5. The Samana Ascetic Life Corresponding  
1. Nibbāna  

1. At that time, the Venerable Sāriputta was dwelling in the region of Vaṭṭa, on the bank of the Ganges at Ukkacelā.  

2. Then a wandering ascetic approached the Venerable Sāriputta’s dwelling. Having exchanged polite and courteous greetings with the Venerable Sāriputta, he sat down to one side.  

3. Sitting to one side, the wandering ascetic said to the Venerable Sāriputta: “Friend Sāriputta, it is said: ‘Nibbāna, Nibbāna.’ But what, friend, is Nibbāna?”  

“Friend, the destruction of greed, the destruction of hatred, the destruction of delusion—this is called Nibbāna.”  

4. “Then, friend, is there a path to attain this Nibbāna? Is there a way to practice?”  

“Friend, there is a path to attain this Nibbāna. There is a way to practice.”  

5. “Friend, what is the path to attain this Nibbāna? What is the way to practice?”  

“Friend, it is this Noble Eightfold Path that leads to the attainment of Nibbāna: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration. This, friend, is the path to attain Nibbāna. This is the way to practice.”  

6. “Friend, this path to attain Nibbāna is excellent, this way to practice is excellent. Friend, it is enough to strive diligently.”  

2–15. (Identical to the Yamaka-vagga’s sections 2–15.)  

16. Difficulty  

※3. “Friend Sāriputta, what is difficult in this teaching?”  

“Friend, in this teaching, going forth (as an ascetic) is difficult.”  

4. “Friend, for one who has gone forth, what is difficult?”  

“Friend, for one who has gone forth, contentment is difficult.”  

5. “Friend Sāriputta, for one who is content, what is difficult?”  

“Friend, for one who is content, practicing in accordance with the Dhamma is difficult.”  

6. “Friend, could a bhikkhu who practices in accordance with the Dhamma become an arahant in no long time?”  

“Friend, he could become an arahant in no long time.”  

The Samana Ascetic Life Corresponding (End).  

Its Summary Verses:  
(Same as the previous corresponding section’s summary verses.)