5. The Self as Island Chapter

43. 1. The Self as Island

1-2. [At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi...]...

3. "Monks, be islands unto yourselves, be your own refuge, having no other; let the Dharma be your island and your refuge, with no other refuge.

4. Monks, being islands unto yourselves, relying on yourselves, not relying on others; having the Dharma as your island, the Dharma as your refuge, with no other refuge, you should investigate properly: Where do sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair arise? Where do they originate?

5. Monks, where do sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair arise? Where do they originate?

6. Monks, here the ignorant worldling, who has not seen the noble ones, who is unskilled in the noble Dharma, untrained in the noble Dharma; who has not seen good persons, unskilled in the good persons' Dharma, untrained in the good persons' Dharma, regards form as self, self as possessing form, form in self, or self in form. For that person, form changes and alters. With the change and alteration of form, there arise sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair.

7. One regards feeling as self... perception as self... 

8. [perception as self...]

9. [volitional formations as self...]

10. Regards consciousness as self, self as possessing consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. For that person, consciousness changes and alters. With the change and alteration of consciousness, there arise sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair.

11. Monks, knowing form as impermanent, changing, fading away, and ceasing; seeing with right wisdom as it truly is that all past, present, and future form is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, one abandons sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair. Abandoning these, one does not tremble; not trembling, one dwells happily. Thus dwelling, the monk is liberated and inclined towards complete Nibbana.

12. Monks, knowing feeling as impermanent... [as above]...

13. Monks, knowing perception as impermanent... 

14. Monks, knowing volitional formations as impermanent... 

15. Monks, knowing consciousness as impermanent, changing, fading away, and ceasing; seeing with right wisdom as it truly is that all past, present, and future consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, one abandons sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair. Abandoning these, one does not tremble; not trembling, one dwells happily. Thus dwelling, the monk is liberated and inclined towards complete Nibbana."

44. 2. The Path

1-2. [At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi...]...

3. "Monks, I will teach you the path leading to the origination of identity and the path leading to the cessation of identity. Listen carefully.

4. What is the path leading to the origination of identity?

5. Here, monks, the ignorant worldling regards form as self... [as above]...

6-8. Regards feeling as self... perception as self... volitional formations as self...

9. Regards consciousness as self...

10. This is the path leading to the origination of identity. Therefore, monks, this view is the support for the arising of suffering.

11. What is the path leading to the cessation of identity?

12. Here, a well-taught noble disciple does not regard form as self... [as above]...

13-15. Does not regard feeling... perception... volitional formations...

16. Does not regard consciousness as self...

17. This is the path leading to the cessation of identity. Therefore, monks, this view is the support for the cessation of suffering."

45. 3. Impermanent (1)

1-2. [At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi...]...

3. "Monks, form is impermanent. Impermanent is suffering. What is suffering is non-self. What is non-self should be seen as it truly is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine; this I am not; this is not my self.' Seeing thus, the mind is devoid of clinging, liberated from taints.

4-6. Feeling... perception... volitional formations...

7. Consciousness is impermanent... [as above]...

8. Monks, if a monk’s mind is devoid of clinging and liberated from taints regarding form... feeling... perception... volitional formations... consciousness, then due to liberation, he abides long; abiding long, he becomes content; becoming content, he is not agitated. Thus unagitated, he attains Nibbana, knowing: 'Birth is destroyed; the holy life has been lived; what was to be done has been done; there will be no more coming to any state of being.'"

46. 4. Impermanent (2)

1-2. [At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi...]...

3. "Monks, form is impermanent. Impermanent is suffering. Suffering is non-self. What is non-self should be seen as it truly is with right wisdom: 'This is not mine; this I am not; this is not my self.'

4-6. Feeling... perception... volitional formations...

7. Consciousness is impermanent... [as above]...

8. Seeing thus with right wisdom, one does not adhere to views of the past or cling to views of the future. Without clinging or grasping, regarding form... consciousness, the mind is devoid of clinging, liberated from taints. Thus liberated, he abides long... attains Nibbana, knowing: 'Birth is destroyed... no more coming to any state of being.'"

47. 5. Views

1-2. [At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi...]...

3. "Monks, certain ascetics and brahmins hold various views regarding self. All these views are based on the five aggregates subject to clinging or one of them.

4. What five?

5. Here, the ignorant worldling regards form as self... [as above]...

6. There is mind, phenomena, the element of ignorance. When contacted by ignorance-contact, the untrained worldling thinks: 'I am,' 'This is mine,' 'I exist,' 'I am material,' 'I am immaterial,' 'I have perception,' 'I am without perception,' 'I am neither with perception nor without perception.'

7. Monks, even here the five faculties remain. But when a noble disciple eradicates ignorance and generates knowledge, with the destruction of ignorance and arising of knowledge, he does not think: 'I am,' 'This is mine,' 'I exist,' 'I am material,' 'immaterial,' 'with perception,' 'without perception,' 'neither with nor without perception.'"

48. 6. Aggregates

1-2. [At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi...]...

3. "Monks, I will teach you the five aggregates and the five aggregates subject to clinging. Listen.

4. What are the five aggregates subject to clinging?

5. All form, whether past, future, present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near: this is called form-aggregate.

6-8. All feeling... perception... volitional formations...

9. All consciousness, whether past...: this is called consciousness-aggregate.

10. These are the five aggregates.

11. What are the five aggregates subject to clinging?

12. All form, past... far or near, that is tainted and subject to clinging: the form aggregate subject to clinging.

13-16. Similarly for feeling... perception... volitional formations... consciousness..."

49. 7. Soṇa (1)

1. Thus have I heard. Once the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove.

2. Then the householder’s son Soṇa approached the Blessed One... sat to one side.

3. The Blessed One said to Soṇa:

4. "Soṇa, when ascetics or brahmins regard self as superior, equal, or inferior to what is impermanent, suffering, and changeable (form), how could they possibly perceive reality correctly?

5-8. [Similarly for feeling... perception... volitional formations... consciousness...]

9. But when they do not regard self in such terms regarding what is impermanent, suffering, and changeable, how could they fail to perceive reality correctly?

14. Soṇa, what do you think: Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, venerable sir... Hence, ‘This is not mine; this I am not; this is not my self’—so should one regard it with right wisdom."

19. "Therefore, Soṇa, whatever form—past, future, present...—this should be seen as it truly is: ‘This is not mine; this I am not; this is not my self.’

20-23. Similarly for feeling... perception... volitional formations... consciousness...

24. When a noble disciple sees thus, he becomes disenchanted with form... consciousness... Through disenchantment, he is liberated; liberation arises from knowing: ‘Birth is destroyed... no more coming to any state of being.’"

50. 8. Soṇa (2)

1-2. [Same setting as previous sutta.]

3-5. "Soṇa, those ascetics or brahmins who do not know form... its origin, cessation, and path leading to cessation; likewise for feeling... perception... volitional formations... consciousness—they cannot be considered true ascetics or brahmins by me. But those who know these things can."

51. 9. End of Delight (1)

1-2. [At one time... Savatthi...]

3-7. "Monks, when a monk perceives impermanent form as impermanent, he attains right view... Disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. With the end of delight comes the end of lust; with the end of lust comes the end of delight. Thus the mind is liberated and fully released."

52. 10. End of Delight (2)

1-2. [Similarly...]

3-7. "Monks, by attending closely and truly perceiving the impermanence of form... consciousness, a monk becomes disenchanted, leading to the end of delight and lust, thus attaining liberation."

End of the Chapter on the Self as Island.

Summary verses:
Self as Island, Path, two on Impermanence, Views, Aggregates, Soṇa (two), two on Ending Delight.

Conclusion of the First Fifty Suttas.

Summary verses for the first chapter:
Named after Soṇa and others—The first fifty suttas are concluded.