2.  
[11] 1. Iṣi Nigaṇṭha  

1.  
Once, the Blessed One was dwelling at Iṣi Nigaṇṭha in the Iṣi Nigaṇṭha Grove.  

2.  
There, the Blessed One addressed the monks: “Monks, I wish to enter seclusion for three months. Let no one come to me except the one who brings almsfood.”  
“Yes, venerable sir,” those monks replied. Except for the one who brought almsfood, no one approached the Blessed One.  

3.  
Then, after three months, the Blessed One emerged from seclusion and addressed the monks: “Monks, if wanderers of other sects ask you: ‘Friends, on what basis did the ascetic Gotama dwell during the rains retreat?’—monks, when asked thus, you should answer: ‘Friends, the Blessed One dwelled during the rains retreat mostly immersed in mindfulness of breathing.’  

4.  
Monks, here I breathe in mindfully and breathe out mindfully.  

5–10.  
When breathing in long, I know: ‘I breathe in long’; when breathing out long, I know: ‘I breathe out long’... up to... I know: ‘observing relinquishment, I breathe in’; I know: ‘observing relinquishment, I breathe out.’  

11.  
Monks, it is rightly said that this is a noble dwelling, a divine dwelling, the Tathāgata’s dwelling. Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated, is rightly called a noble dwelling, a divine dwelling, the Tathāgata’s dwelling.”  

12.  
“Monks, a monk who is a learner, not yet attained to mind’s ideal, dwelling aspiring for the supreme security from bondage, should develop and cultivate mindfulness of breathing to destroy the taints. Monks, a monk who is an arahant, whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what was to be done, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, utterly destroyed the fetters of existence, and is liberated by final knowledge—developing and cultivating mindfulness of breathing leads to pleasant dwelling in this very life and to mindfulness and clear comprehension.”  

13.  
“Monks, it is rightly said that this is a noble dwelling, a divine dwelling, the Tathāgata’s dwelling. Mindfulness of breathing, developed and cultivated, is rightly called a noble dwelling, a divine dwelling, the Tathāgata’s dwelling.”  

[12] 2. Lomasakaṅgiya  

1.  
Once, the Venerable Lomasakaṅgiya was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park.  

2.  
Then Mahānāma the Sakyan approached the Venerable Lomasakaṅgiya, paid homage, sat down, and asked:  

3.  
“Venerable sir, is the dwelling of a learner the same as the Tathāgata’s dwelling, or are they different?”  

4.  
“Friend Mahānāma, the dwelling of a learner is not the same as the Tathāgata’s dwelling. They are different. A learner monk, not yet attained to mind’s ideal, dwells aspiring for the supreme security from bondage by abandoning the five hindrances. What five? Abandoning sensual desire, ill will, sloth-torpor, restlessness-remorse, and doubt.  

5.  
But an arahant monk, whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the holy life, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, and is liberated by final knowledge, has abandoned the five hindrances—cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, unable to arise again. Thus, the dwellings are different.”  

6.  
“Once, the Blessed One dwelt at Iṣi Nigaṇṭha... (as in §§7–20, repeating the earlier discourse)... Thus, the dwellings are different.”  

[13] 3. Ānanda (1)  

1–2.  
At Sāvatthī... The Venerable Ānanda asked the Blessed One:  

3.  
“Venerable sir, can one thing, when developed and cultivated, fulfill four things? Four things fulfilling seven? Seven things fulfilling two?”  

4.  
“Yes, Ānanda. Mindfulness of breathing fulfills the four establishments of mindfulness. The four fulfill the seven enlightenment factors. The seven fulfill true knowledge and liberation.”  

5–35.  
(Detailed explanation parallels earlier sections, showing how mindfulness of breathing leads through the four establishments, seven enlightenment factors, to knowledge and liberation.)  

[14] 4. Ānanda (2)  
(Repetition of earlier structure with minor variations.)  

[15] 5. The Monk (1)  
[16] 6. The Monk (2)  
(Similar dialogues between the Buddha and monks, reiterating the same progressive path through mindfulness of breathing.)  

[17] 7. Fetters  
[18] 8. Underlying Tendencies  
[19] 9. Courses of Action  
[20] 10. Destruction of Taints  
(Each short sutta states that developing mindfulness of breathing leads to destroying fetters, abandoning tendencies, understanding actions, and ending taints, with the same illustrative structure.)  

End of the Second Chapter.  

Summary Verses:  
Iṣi Nigaṇṭha,  
Lomasakaṅgiya,  
Ānanda and the monks,  
Fetters, tendencies,  
Courses, taints.