3. The Hundred Hands Chapter  

[21] 1. Mahānāma (1)  

1. Thus have I heard. At one time, the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Nigrodha Grove.  

2. Then Mahānāma the Sakyan approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, Mahānāma the Sakyan said to the Blessed One:  

3. "Venerable sir, this Kapilavatthu is rich, prosperous, populous, crowded, and bustling. When I serve the Blessed One or a monk who is practicing mindfulness, in the evening I enter Kapilavatthu. I encounter runaway elephants, runaway horses, runaway chariots, runaway carts, and runaway people. At that time, I lose mindfulness of the Blessed One, lose mindfulness of the Dhamma, lose mindfulness of the Saṅgha. Venerable sir, I think: 'If I were to die at that time, what would be my destination? What would be my future course?'"  

4. "Do not fear, Mahānāma! Do not be terrified! For you, there is no bad death, no bad passing away. Mahānāma, one who for a long time has thoroughly cultivated faith in the Buddha, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom—when this body made up of the four great elements, produced by mother and father, sustained by rice and porridge, subject to impermanence, disintegration, breaking apart, and dissolution, is devoured by crows, vultures, hawks, dogs, jackals, or various creatures—the mind, developed for a long time in faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, rises upward and advances.  

5. Mahānāma, suppose a man were to immerse a pot of ghee or oil into a deep pool of water and break it. Its fragments and shards would sink downward, but the ghee or oil would rise upward and advance. Similarly, Mahānāma, one who for a long time has thoroughly cultivated faith in the Buddha, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom—when this body... the mind, developed for a long time, rises upward and advances.  

6. Mahānāma, you have long cultivated faith in the Buddha, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom. Do not fear, Mahānāma! Do not be terrified! For you, there is no bad death, no bad passing away."  

[22] 2. Mahānāma (2)  

1. Thus have I heard...  

2. Then Mahānāma the Sakyan...  

3. "Venerable sir, this Kapilavatthu..."  

4. "Do not fear, Mahānāma! Do not be terrified! For you, there is no bad death, no bad passing away. Mahānāma, a noble disciple endowed with four qualities leans toward Nibbāna, slopes toward Nibbāna, inclines toward Nibbāna. What four?  

5. Mahānāma, here a noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha thus: 'The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.' He possesses unwavering confidence in the Dhamma... in the Saṅgha... and he possesses the virtues dear to the noble ones—unbroken, untorn, unblemished, unmottled, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.  

6. Mahānāma, suppose a tree leaning eastward, slanting eastward, inclining eastward. If its roots were cut, where would it fall?"  
"Venerable sir, it would fall in whatever direction it leans."  
"Similarly, Mahānāma, a noble disciple endowed with these four qualities leans toward Nibbāna, slopes toward Nibbāna, inclines toward Nibbāna."  

[23] 3. Sāḷha  

1. (At Kapilavatthu).  

2. Then Mahānāma the Sakyan approached Sāḷha the Sakyan...  

3. "Sāḷha, how many qualities must one possess to be a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the lower world, fixed in destiny, headed for enlightenment?"  

4. "Mahānāma, three qualities: One possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha... Dhamma... Saṅgha... the virtues dear to the noble ones..."  

5. "But I say, Sāḷha, four qualities..."  

6. "Wait, Mahānāma! The Blessed One knows..."  

7. Then both approached the Blessed One...  

8-14. (Mahānāma relates their debate to the Buddha, reaffirming his position on four qualities).  

15. "Sāḷha, why do you not approve of Mahānāma's statement?"  
"Venerable sir, I could only say it is excellent and good!"  

[24] 4. Satulakāyika (1)  

1. (At Kapilavatthu).  

2. When Sakyan Satulakāyika died, the Buddha declared him a stream-enterer.  

3. Other Sakyans complained: "He drank wine yet is called a stream-enterer!"  

4-5. Mahānāma reports this to the Buddha. The Buddha replies that Satulakāyika's long-standing faith in the Triple Gem prevented rebirth in lower realms.  

6-13. The Buddha explains various grades of practitioners.  

14. "Mahānāma, could even a great crowd who know good and bad speaking become stream-enterers? How much more Satulakāyika, who took the precepts at death!"  

[25] 5. Satulakāyika (2)  

1-13. Parallel to previous sutta, substituting imperfect virtue with good roots in Dhamma.  

14. The Buddha compares Dhamma practice to seeds in good soil, concluding Satulakāyika's spiritual development.  

[26] 6. Virtue (1)  

1. At Sāvatthi.  

2-25. When Anāthapiṇḍika is gravely ill, Sāriputta reassures him by reviewing his virtues and right view.  

26. The Buddha praises Sāriputta's teaching as explaining the Four Factors of Stream-entry through ten aspects.  

[27] 7. Virtue (2)  

1-9. Parallel account with Ānanda visiting Anāthapiṇḍika, explaining how the Four Factors remove fear of death.  

10. Ānanda declares Anāthapiṇḍika a stream-enterer.  

[28] 8. Enemies  

1-7. The Buddha explains to Anāthapiṇḍika how abandoning five dangerous behaviors (kill, steal, sexual misconduct, lie, liquor) and developing Four Factors leads to stream-entry.  

[29] 9. Fear  

1-7. Repeats previous discourse to monks.  

[30] 10. Licchavi  

1. At Vesālī.  

2-5. The Buddha tells Licchavi minister Nanda that Four Factors ensure stream-entry.  

6. Conclusion with verse:  
"Faith in the Buddha unshakable,  
Virtues praised by noble ones,  
Confidence in the Saṅgha firm—  
One thus is called 'abundant wealth'."  

Chapter on Hundred Hands, with summaries:  
Two Mahānāmas, Sāḷha, two Satulakāyika, two on virtue, Enemies, Fear, Licchavi—ten suttas total.