1. The Chapter on Impermanence (1) Internal  

1. Thus have I heard. At one time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapindika’s Park.  
2. There, the Blessed One addressed the monks: "Monks!" The monks replied to the Blessed One: "Venerable Sir!"  
3. The Blessed One said: "Monks! The eye is impermanent. Whatever is impermanent is suffering. Whatever is suffering is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
4. The ear is impermanent. Whatever is impermanent...  
5. The nose is impermanent. Whatever is impermanent...  
6. The tongue is impermanent. Whatever is impermanent...  
7. The body is impermanent. Whatever is impermanent... This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
8. The mind is impermanent. Whatever is impermanent is suffering. Whatever is suffering is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
9. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted with the eye, disenchanted with the ear, disenchanted with the nose, disenchanted with the tongue, disenchanted with the body, disenchanted with the mind. Through disenchantment, one becomes free from craving. Through freedom from craving, there is liberation. When liberated, the knowledge arises: ‘I am liberated.’ One understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’  

(2) The Second on Suffering (1) Internal  

3. "Monks! The eye is suffering. Whatever is suffering is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
4–7. The ear is suffering... The nose is suffering... The tongue is suffering... The body is suffering...  
8. The mind is suffering. Whatever is suffering is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
9. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple understands... there is no more coming to any state of being."  

(3) The Third on Non-Self (1) Internal  

3. "Monks! The eye is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
4–7. The ear is non-self... The nose is non-self... The tongue is non-self... The body is non-self...  
8. The mind is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
9. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple understands... there is no more coming to any state of being."  

(4) The Fourth on Impermanence (2) External  

3. "Monks! Form is impermanent. Whatever is impermanent is suffering. Whatever is suffering is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
4–7. Sound... Odor... Taste... Touch...  
8. Mental phenomena are impermanent. Whatever is impermanent is suffering. Whatever is suffering is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
9. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted with form, disenchanted with sound, disenchanted with odor, disenchanted with taste, disenchanted with touch, disenchanted with mental phenomena. Through disenchantment, one becomes free from craving. Through freedom from craving, there is liberation. When liberated, the knowledge arises: ‘I am liberated.’ One understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’"  

(5) The Fifth on Suffering (2) External  

3. "Monks! Form is suffering. Whatever is suffering is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
4–7. Sound is... Odor is... Taste is... Touch is...  
8. Mental phenomena are suffering. Whatever is suffering is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
9. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple understands... there is no more coming to any state of being."  

(6) The Sixth on Non-Self (2) External  

3. "Monks! Form is non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
4–7. Sound is... Odor is... Taste is... Touch is...  
8. Mental phenomena are non-self. Whatever is non-self should be regarded as: ‘This is not mine, this is not I, this is not my self.’ This should be seen as it really is with proper wisdom.  
9. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple understands... there is no more coming to any state of being."  

(7) The Seventh on Impermanence (3) Internal  

3. "Monks! The eye of the past and future is impermanent, let alone the present eye. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past eye, takes no delight in the future eye, and practices with disgust toward the present eye, for its fading away and cessation.  
4–5. The ear of the past and future is impermanent... The nose of the past and future is impermanent...  
6. The tongue of the past and future is impermanent, let alone the present tongue. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past tongue, takes no delight in the future tongue, and practices with disgust toward the present tongue, for its fading away and cessation.  
7. The body of the past and future is impermanent...  
8. The mind of the past and future is impermanent, let alone the present mind. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past mind, takes no delight in the future mind, and practices with disgust toward the present mind, for its fading away and cessation."  

(8) The Eighth on Suffering (3) Internal  

3–7. "Monks! The eye of the past and future is suffering, let alone the present eye. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past eye, takes no delight in the future eye, and practices with disgust toward the present eye, for its fading away and cessation. The ear of the past and future is... The nose of the past and future is... The tongue of the past and future is... The body of the past and future is...  
8. The mind of the past and future is suffering, let alone the present mind. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past mind, takes no delight in the future mind, and practices with disgust toward the present mind, for its fading away and cessation."  

(9) The Ninth on Non-Self (3) Internal  

3. "Monks! The eye of the past and future is non-self, let alone the present eye. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past eye, takes no delight in the future eye, and practices with disgust toward the present eye, for its fading away and cessation.  
4–7. The ear of the past and future is... The nose of the past and future is... The tongue of the past and future is... The body of the past and future is...  
8. The mind of the past and future is non-self, let alone the present mind. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past mind, takes no delight in the future mind, and practices with disgust toward the present mind, for its fading away and cessation."  

(10) The Tenth on Impermanence (4) External  

3. "Monks! Form of the past and future is impermanent, let alone the present form. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past form, takes no delight in the future form, and practices with disgust toward the present form, for its fading away and cessation.  
4–7. Sound of the past and future is... Odor of the past and future is... Taste of the past and future is... Touch of the past and future is...  
8. Mental phenomena of the past and future are impermanent, let alone the present mental phenomena. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past mental phenomena, takes no delight in the future mental phenomena, and practices with disgust toward the present mental phenomena, for its fading away and cessation."  

(11) The Eleventh on Suffering (4) External  

3. "Monks! Form of the past and future is suffering, let alone the present form. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past form, takes no delight in the future form, and practices with disgust toward the present form, for its fading away and cessation.  
4–7. Sound of the past and future is... Odor of the past and future is... Taste of the past and future is... Touch of the past and future is...  
8. Mental phenomena of the past and future are suffering, let alone the present mental phenomena. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past mental phenomena, takes no delight in the future mental phenomena, and practices with disgust toward the present mental phenomena, for its fading away and cessation."  

(12) The Twelfth on Non-Self (4) External  

3. "Monks! Form of the past and future is non-self, let alone the present form. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past form, takes no delight in the future form, and practices with disgust toward the present form, for its fading away and cessation.  
4–7. Sound of the past and future is... Odor of the past and future is... Taste of the past and future is... Touch of the past and future is...  
8. Mental phenomena of the past and future are non-self, let alone the present mental phenomena. Monks! When one sees thus, a learned noble disciple has no longing for the past mental phenomena, takes no delight in the future mental phenomena, and practices with disgust toward the present mental phenomena, for its fading away and cessation."  

The First Chapter on Impermanence (End)  

The Summary Verses:  
Impermanent, suffering, non-self—  
Three aspects, internal and external.  
Expounded through impermanence,  
Each with their own inner and outer.