2. Chapter on Evil Deeds  

[11] First: The Unrighteous One Sunk in a Pit  

1. Thus have I heard. Once, the Blessed One was dwelling at Bamboo Grove in Rajagaha.  

2. "Friend, as I descended from Vulture Peak, I saw a head sunk in a cesspit."  

3. "Monks, this being was an unrighteous person in Rajagaha in a past life."  

[12] Second: The Wicked Brahmin Who Ate Feces  

1. "Friend, as I descended from Vulture Peak, I saw a man submerged in a cesspit up to his hands, eating feces."  

2. "Monks, this being was a brahmin in this Rajagaha in the past. When the teachings of the Fully Enlightened One Kassapa were being preached, he filled the alms bowls of the monastic community with feces during an invitation for alms and said, ‘Venerable ones, take what you desire and go!’..."  

[13] Third: The Skinless Woman ~ Adulteress  

1. "Friend, as I descended from Vulture Peak, I saw a skinned woman moving through the air. Vultures, crows, and hawks pursued her, pecking and tearing her apart, while she uttered cries of agony."  

2. "Monks, this woman was an adulteress in Rajagaha in the past..."  

[14] Fourth: The Ugly Divination Woman  

1. "Friend, as I descended from Vulture Peak, I saw a foul-smelling, ugly woman moving through the air. Vultures, crows, and hawks pursued her, pecking and tearing her apart, while she uttered cries of agony."  

2. "Monks, this woman was a diviner in Rajagaha in the past..."  

[15] Fifth: The Scorched Woman Who Threw a Companion into Fire  

1. "Friend, as I descended from Vulture Peak, I saw a woman scorched by embers moving through the air, uttering cries of agony."  

2. "Monks, this woman was the chief consort of King Kalinga in the past. Out of jealousy, she threw one of the king’s daughters into a firepot filled with burning charcoal..."  

[16] Sixth: The Headless Executioner  

1. "Friend, as I descended from Vulture Peak, I saw a headless torso moving through the air, with eyes and a mouth on its chest."  

2. Vultures, crows, and hawks pursued it, pecking and tearing it apart, while it uttered cries of agony.  

3. "Monks, this being was an executioner named Halikka in Rajagaha in the past..."  

[17] Seventh: The Monk  

1. "Friend, as I descended from Vulture Peak, I saw a monk moving through the air.  

2. His robe was burning intensely, with flames rising. His alms bowl was burning intensely, with flames rising. His belt was burning intensely, with flames rising. His body was burning intensely, with flames rising. He uttered cries of agony."  

3. "Monks, this monk was a corrupt monk during the teachings of the Fully Enlightened One Kassapa..."  

[18] Eighth: The Nun  

1. "I... saw a nun moving through the air.  

2. Her robe was burning intensely..."  

3. "...she was a corrupt nun..."  

[19] Ninth: The Novice Nun  

1. "Friend... I saw a novice nun moving through the air.  

2. Her robe was burning intensely..."  

3. "...she was a corrupt novice nun..."  

[20] Tenth: The Novice Monk  

1. "...I saw a novice monk moving through the air.  

2-3. His robe was burning intensely...", "...he was a corrupt novice monk..."  

[21] Eleventh: The Female Novice Monk  

1. "Friend, as I descended from Vulture Peak, I saw a female novice monk moving through the air.  

2. Her robe was burning intensely, with flames rising. Her alms bowl was burning intensely, with flames rising. Her belt was burning intensely, with flames rising. Her body was burning intensely, with flames rising. She uttered cries of agony.  

3. Friend, then I thought: ‘Truly wondrous, truly astonishing! Such is the nature of beings. Such is the nature of spirits. Such is the consequence of one’s own deeds!’"  

4. Then the Blessed One addressed the monks: "Monks, a disciple truly dwells with the eye of wisdom. Monks, a disciple truly dwells in true knowledge. A disciple knows thus, sees thus, and attains realization thus.  

5. Monks, though I saw that female novice monk, I did not explain it. Even if I had explained it, she would not have believed me. Those who disbelieve me will long experience harm and suffering.  

6. Monks, this female novice monk was a corrupt novice nun during the teachings of the Fully Enlightened One Kassapa. Due to her karmic residue, after enduring hell for many years, hundreds of years, thousands of years, hundreds of thousands of years, she now experiences this state as the remnant of her deeds."  

These verses summarize:  
The unrighteous sunk in pits,  
The wicked brahmin who ate feces,  
The skinned adulteress,  
The ugly divination woman,  
The scorched woman who burned others,  
The headless executioner,  
Monks, nuns, corrupt novices,  
Novice monks and nuns—  
All who committed evil deeds  
Under Kassapa Buddha’s rule.