1. The First Intermediate Chapter First  

1.1 First: Pleasing and Displeasing  

2. “Bhikkhus, a woman endowed with five qualities is highly displeasing to a man. What are the five? She is unattractive, lacks wealth, lacks virtue, is lazy, and does not bear children for a man. Bhikkhus, a woman endowed with these five qualities is highly displeasing to a man.  

3. Bhikkhus, a woman endowed with five qualities is highly pleasing to a man. What are the five? She is attractive, possesses wealth, is virtuous, skillful and not lazy, and bears children for a man. Bhikkhus, a woman endowed with these five qualities is highly pleasing to a man.”  

1.2 Second: Pleasing and Displeasing  

2. “Bhikkhus, a man endowed with five qualities is highly displeasing to a woman. What are the five? He is unattractive, lacks wealth, lacks virtue, is lazy, and does not father children for her. Bhikkhus, a man endowed with these five qualities is highly displeasing to a woman.  

3. Bhikkhus, a man endowed with five qualities is highly pleasing to a woman. What are the five? He is attractive, possesses wealth, is virtuous, skillful and not lazy, and fathers children for her. Bhikkhus, a man endowed with these five qualities is highly pleasing to a woman.”  

1.3 Third: Unique Suffering  

2. “Bhikkhus, these five are unique sufferings of women, which women endure more than men. What are the five?  

3. A woman, when young, goes to live with her husband’s family, separated from her own relatives. This is the first unique suffering of women, which they endure more than men.  

4. A woman menstruates. This is the second unique suffering of women...  

5. A woman becomes pregnant. This is the third unique suffering...  

6. A woman gives birth. This is the fourth unique suffering...  

7. A woman serves men. This is the fifth unique suffering...  

8. These five are unique sufferings of women, which they endure more than men.”  

1.4 Fourth: Three Qualities  

2. “Bhikkhus, a woman endowed with three qualities, upon the breakup of the body and death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad destination, the lower realm, hell. What are the three?  

3. She dwells in her household in the morning with a mind full of stinginess, at noon with a mind full of envy, and in the evening with a mind full of sensual desire.  

4. Bhikkhus, a woman endowed with these three qualities...”  

(Ananda’s Discipline, 1: Dark Section)  

2. Then the Venerable Ananda approached the Blessed One...  

3. Sitting to one side, he said: “Venerable Sir, with my divine eye surpassing ordinary vision, I see women who, after death, are reborn in places of loss, evil destinations, the lower realm, hell. Venerable Sir, how many qualities must a woman possess to be reborn thus?”  

1.5 First: Wrathful  

4. “Ananda, a woman endowed with five qualities is reborn... What five?  

5. She is faithless, shameless, imprudent, wrathful, and unwise.  

6. Ananda, a woman endowed with these five...”  

1.6 Second: Hateful  

4. “Ananda, a woman endowed with five qualities...  

5. Faithless, shameless, imprudent, hateful, unwise...”  

1.7 Third: Envious  

4. “...envious...”  

1.8 Fourth: Stingy  

4. “...stingy...”  

1.9 Fifth: Immoral  

4. “...immoral...”  

1.10 Sixth: Weak in Virtue  

4. “...weak in virtue...”  

1.11 Seventh: Unlearned  

4. “...unlearned...”  

1.12 Eighth: Lazy  

4. “...lazy...”  

1.13 Ninth: Forgetful  

4. “...forgetful...”  

1.14 Tenth: Five Offenses  

4. “...five offenses:  

5. Killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and indulging in intoxicants leading to heedlessness.  

6. Ananda, a woman endowed with these five is reborn...”