1 THE FIRST – ONE THING (1)  
1.1 At Savatthi...  
1.2 ...the Blessed One said:  
1.3 “Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated, it leads to great fruit and great benefit. What is that one thing? Mindfulness of breathing.  
1.4 Here, a bhikkhu, having gone to the wilderness, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, sits down cross-legged, sets his body upright, establishes mindfulness before him, and mindfully breathes in and mindfully breathes out.  
1.5 Breathing in long, he knows: ‘I breathe in long’; breathing out long, he knows: ‘I breathe out long.’ Breathing in short, he knows: ‘I breathe in short’; breathing out short, he knows: ‘I breathe out short.’  
1.6 He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in experiencing the whole body’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out experiencing the whole body.’ He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in calming the bodily formation’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out calming the bodily formation.’  
1.7 He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in experiencing joy’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out experiencing joy.’ He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in experiencing pleasure’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out experiencing pleasure.’  
1.8 He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in experiencing the mental formation’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out experiencing the mental formation.’ He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in calming the mental formation’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out calming the mental formation.’ He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in experiencing the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out experiencing the mind.’  
1.9 He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in gladdening the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out gladdening the mind.’ He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in concentrating the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out concentrating the mind.’ He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in liberating the mind’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out liberating the mind.’  
1.10 He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in contemplating impermanence’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out contemplating impermanence.’ He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in contemplating fading away’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out contemplating fading away.’ He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in contemplating cessation’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out contemplating cessation.’ He trains thus: ‘I will breathe in contemplating relinquishment’; he trains thus: ‘I will breathe out contemplating relinquishment.’  
1.11 When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way, it leads to great fruit and great benefit.”  

1.2 THE SECOND – ENLIGHTENMENT FACTORS  
2.1 At Savatthi...  
2.2 “Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it leads to great fruit and great benefit. How, bhikkhus, is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to lead to great fruit and great benefit?  
2.3 Here, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by mindfulness of breathing, relying on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in relinquishment. He develops the enlightenment factor of discrimination... the enlightenment factor of energy... the enlightenment factor of rapture... the enlightenment factor of tranquility... the enlightenment factor of concentration... the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by mindfulness of breathing, relying on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in relinquishment.  
2.4 When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way, it leads to great fruit and great benefit.”  

1.3 THE THIRD – PURIFICATION  
3.1 At Savatthi...  
3.2 “Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it leads to great fruit and great benefit... (as above, repeating the steps up to ‘contemplating relinquishment’)...  
3.3 When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way, it leads to great fruit and great benefit.”  

1.4 THE FOURTH – FRUITS (1)  
4.1 ...“Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated... (as above)... one of two fruits may be expected: either final knowledge here and now or, if there is a residue of clinging, non-return.”  

1.5 THE FIFTH – FRUITS (2)  
5.1 ...“Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated... seven fruits and benefits may be expected: 1. Realization here and now; 2. If not in this life, at the time of death; 3. With the destruction of the five lower fetters, becoming an attainer of intermediate涅槃... 4....up to reaching the Akaniṭṭha realm.”  

1.6 THE SIXTH – ARIṬṬHA  
6.1 ...The Blessed One said: “Bhikkhus, develop mindfulness of breathing.”  
6.2 When Venerable Ariṭṭha claimed to practice it incorrectly, the Buddha corrected him, teaching the full method as above.  

1.7 THE SEVENTH – MAHĀKAPPINA  
7.1 ...The Buddha praised Venerable Mahākappina’s unwavering posture through mindfulness of breathing, stating: “One who develops this concentration attains steadiness of body and mind.”  

1.8 THE EIGHTH – THE LAMP  
8.1 ...“Bhikkhus, when mindfulness-of-breathing concentration is developed, even harsh perceptions like ‘repulsive’ or ‘non-repulsive’ are abandoned. It leads through the four jhānas, formless attainments, and cessation. Just as a lamp dies when oil and wick are exhausted, so too, feeling ceases with the breakup of the body.”  

1.9 THE NINTH – VESĀLĪ  
9.1 ...When monks committed suicide due to excessive focus on foulness, the Buddha taught mindfulness of breathing as a serene alternative, comparing it to a sudden rain that quenches dust.  

1.10 THE TENTH – KIMBILA  
10.1 ...The Buddha explained to Kimbila how mindfulness of breathing fulfills the four foundations of mindfulness, comparing it to a crossroads mound crushed by wagons from all directions.  

This section ends with a summary verse:  
The One Thing, Enlightenment Factors, Purification, Two Fruits, Ariṭṭha, Kappina, Lamp, Vesālī, Kimbila.