1. The Section on the Peaceful One  

104. The First: The Peaceful One  

2. "Monks, I will teach you the doctrine of the peaceful one, the teaching of the Dhamma. Listen attentively."  

3. "Monks, what is the doctrine of the peaceful one?"  

4. "Monks, forms cognizable by the eye that are pleasant, delightful, enjoyable, charming, entrancing, and lust-inducing—these have been abandoned by the Tathagata, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, eradicated, so they are no longer subject to future arising. Because he has abandoned them, the Tathagata proclaims the proper teaching. Thus, the Tathagata is called the peaceful one."  

5-9. "Monks, sounds cognizable by the ear... odors cognizable by the nose... flavors cognizable by the tongue... tangibles cognizable by the body... mental phenomena cognizable by the mind that are pleasant, delightful, enjoyable, charming, entrancing, and lust-inducing—these have been abandoned by the Tathagata, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, eradicated, so they are no longer subject to future arising. Because he has abandoned them, the Tathagata proclaims the proper teaching. Thus, the Tathagata is called the peaceful one."  

10. "Monks, this is the doctrine of the peaceful one, the teaching of the Dhamma."  

105. The Second: Grasping  

2. "Monks, when what exists, through clinging to what, does pleasure and pain arise internally?"  

3. "Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One..."  

4. "Monks, when the eye exists, through clinging to the eye, pleasure and pain arise internally. When the ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind exist, through clinging to the mind, pleasure and pain arise internally.  

5. Monks, what do you think: Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"  
"Impermanent, venerable sir."  
"Now, what is impermanent—is that suffering or happiness?"  
"Suffering, venerable sir."  
"Now, what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change—would one correctly regard it as, 'This is mine. This I am. This is my self'?"  
"No, venerable sir."  

6-10. "Is the ear... nose... tongue... body... mind permanent or impermanent?"  
"Impermanent, venerable sir."  
"Now, what is impermanent—is that suffering or happiness?"  
"Suffering, venerable sir."  
"Now, what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change—would one correctly regard it as, 'This is mine. This I am. This is my self'?"  
"No, venerable sir."  

11. "Seeing thus, a learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted with the eye, disenchanted with the ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Through disenchantment, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion, he is liberated. In liberation, there arises the knowledge: 'I am liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'"  

106. The Third: Suffering  

2. "Monks, I will teach the arising and passing away of suffering. Listen attentively."  

3. "What, monks, is the arising of suffering?"  

4-9. "With the eye and forms as condition, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition, feeling arises. With feeling as condition, craving arises. This is the origin of suffering. With the ear and sounds... nose and odors... tongue and flavors... body and tangibles... mind and mental phenomena as condition, mind-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition, feeling arises. With feeling as condition, craving arises. This is the origin of suffering.  

10. What, monks, is the cessation of suffering?  

11. With the eye and forms as condition, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition, feeling arises. With feeling as condition, craving arises. With the remainderless fading away and cessation of that craving comes cessation of clinging. With cessation of clinging, cessation of existence. With cessation of existence, cessation of birth. With cessation of birth, aging, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and despair cease. Such is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering.  

12-15. (Similarly for ear... body.)  

16. With the mind and mental phenomena as condition, mind-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition, feeling arises. With feeling as condition, craving arises. With the remainderless fading away and cessation of that craving comes cessation of clinging... Such is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering. Monks, this is the cessation of suffering."  

107. The Fourth: The World  

2. "Monks, I will teach the world’s origin and cessation. Listen attentively."  

3. "What, monks, is the origin of the world?"  

4-9. "With the eye and forms as condition, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition, feeling; with feeling, craving; with craving, clinging; with clinging, existence; with existence, birth; with birth, aging, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and despair come to be. This is the origin of the world. (Similarly for ear... mind.)  

10. What, monks, is the cessation of the world?"  

11-16. "With the eye and forms as condition, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition, feeling; with feeling, craving. With the remainderless fading away and cessation of that craving comes cessation of clinging... Such is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering.  

17. Monks, this is the cessation of the world."  

108. The Fifth: Superior  

2. "Monks, when what exists, through clinging to what, through being obsessed with what, does one consider oneself as ‘superior,’ ‘equal,’ or ‘inferior’?"  

3. "Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One..."  

4. "Monks, when the eye exists, through clinging to the eye, through being obsessed with the eye, one considers oneself as ‘superior,’ ‘equal,’ or ‘inferior.’  

5-9. When the ear... mind exists, through clinging to the mind, through being obsessed with the mind, one considers oneself as ‘superior,’ ‘equal,’ or ‘inferior.’  

10. Monks, what do you think: Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"  
"Impermanent, venerable sir."  
"What is impermanent—suffering or happiness?"  
"Suffering, venerable sir."  
"What is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change: would one consider oneself as ‘superior,’ ‘equal,’ or ‘inferior’ by not clinging to it?"  
"No, venerable sir."  

11-15. (Similarly for ear... mind.)  

16. "Seeing thus, a learned noble disciple becomes disenchanted with the eye, ear... mind. Through disenchantment, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion, he is liberated... He understands: ‘Birth is destroyed... no more coming to any state of being.’"  

109. The Sixth: Bonds  

2. "Monks, I will teach things prone to being fettered and the fetter. Listen attentively."  

3. "What are things prone to being fettered? What is the fetter?"  

4. "Monks, the eye is a thing prone to being fettered. Desire and lust for it is the fetter.  

5-9. The ear... mind is a thing prone to being fettered. Desire and lust for it is the fetter.  

10. These are called things prone to being fettered. This is the fetter."  

110. The Seventh: Clinging  

2. "Monks, I will teach things prone to being clung to and the clinging. Listen attentively."  

3. "What are things prone to being clung to? What is the clinging?"  

4. "Monks, the eye is a thing prone to being clung to. Desire and lust for it is the clinging.  

5-9. The ear... mind is a thing prone to being clung to. Desire and lust for it is the clinging.  

10. These are called things prone to being clung to. This is the clinging."  

111. The Eighth: Full Understanding (1)  

2-7. "Monks, without fully understanding, without comprehending, without dispassion toward, and without abandoning the eye... ear... nose... tongue... body... mind, one is incapable of destroying suffering.  

8-13. Monks, by fully understanding, comprehending, developing dispassion toward, and abandoning the eye... ear... nose... tongue... body... mind, one is capable of destroying suffering."  

112. The Ninth: Full Understanding (2)  

2-7. "Monks, without fully understanding, without comprehending, without dispassion toward, and abandoning forms... sounds... odors... flavors... tangibles... mental phenomena, one is incapable of destroying suffering.  

8-13. Monks, by fully understanding, comprehending, developing dispassion toward, and abandoning forms... sounds... odors... flavors... tangibles... mental phenomena, one is capable of destroying suffering."  

113. The Tenth: Overhearing  

1. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Natika in the brick house.  

2. While in seclusion, the Blessed One uttered this teaching:  

3. "With the eye and forms as condition, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition, feeling; with feeling, craving... (as in 107.4)... Such is the origin of this entire mass of suffering.  

4-8. With the ear... mind as condition, mind-consciousness arises... (as in 107.9)... Such is the origin of this entire mass of suffering.  

9. With the eye and forms as condition, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition, feeling; with feeling, craving. With the remainderless fading away and cessation of that craving... (as in 106.11)... Such is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering.  

10-14. With the ear... mind as condition... Such is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering.  

15-17. A monk standing nearby overheard the Blessed One. The Blessed One saw him and said: "Monk, did you hear this teaching?"  
"Yes, venerable sir."  
"Learn this teaching, master it, and remember it. This teaching is beneficial as the basis of the holy life."  

Summary:  
The Peaceful One, Grasping, Suffering, The World, Superior, Bonds, Clinging, Two on Full Understanding, Overhearing.