9. The Parable Chapter  

1.1 Thus have I heard. At one time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī, in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park.  

1.2 Then the Blessed One addressed the monks:  

1.3 "Monks, just as all the rafters of a peaked house converge upon the ridgepole, lean upon the ridgepole, and are united around the ridgepole,  

1.4 so too, all unwholesome states have ignorance as their root, converge upon ignorance, lean upon ignorance, and are united around ignorance.  

1.5 Therefore, monks, you should train yourselves thus: 'We will dwell heedfully.'"  

2.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

2.2 Then the Blessed One took a pinch of soil with his fingertip and addressed the monks:  

2.3 "Monks, what do you think? Which is greater—this pinch of soil I have taken up with my fingertip, or the great earth?"  

2.4 "Venerable sir, the great earth is far greater. This tiny pinch of soil is insignificant compared to the great earth."  

2.5 "Similarly, monks, few are those beings reborn among humans after passing from the human realm. Far more numerous are those reborn in other realms.  

2.6 Therefore, monks, train yourselves thus: 'We will dwell heedfully.'"  

3.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

3.2 "Monks, just as a house with many women and few men is easily broken into by thieves,  

3.3 so too, a monk who does not frequently cultivate liberation through loving-kindness is easily harassed by non-human beings.  

3.4 But monks, a house with few women and many men is difficult for thieves to harass.  

3.5 So too, a monk who frequently cultivates liberation through loving-kindness is not harassed by non-human beings.  

3.6 Therefore, monks, cultivate loving-kindness persistently, as if piling up earth with a cart to build a platform. Train yourselves thus."  

4.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

4.2 "Monks, offering a hundred pots of food at dawn, noon, and evening brings less merit than one moment spent cultivating loving-kindness at those times.  

4.3 Therefore, monks, cultivate loving-kindness persistently, as if piling up earth with a cart to build a platform. Train yourselves thus."  

5.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

5.2 "Monks, suppose a sharp-bladed knife is presented to someone who says: 'I will bend this blade with my hands or twist it with my fists.'  

5.3 Could he succeed?"  

5.4 "No, venerable sir. He would only weary himself."  

5.5 "Similarly, monks, when a cultivator of loving-kindness is targeted by malevolent non-human thoughts, those beings only weary themselves.  

5.6 Therefore, monks, cultivate loving-kindness persistently. Train yourselves thus."  

6.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

6.2 "Monks, suppose four skilled archers stand at the four directions, and a man claims he can catch their arrows mid-flight.  

6.3 Would such a man deserve to be called swift?"  

6.4 "Even catching one arrow would make him swift. How much more so with four!"  

6.5 "But monks, celestial bodies move faster than such speed. Yet human life depletes even faster.  

6.6 Therefore, dwell heedfully. Train yourselves thus."  

7.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

7.2 "Monks, long ago there was a drum named Disaster. Each time it cracked, a new patch was added until only the frame remained.  

7.3 Similarly, future monks will neglect the profound, liberative sutras of emptiness, preferring poetic compositions. Thus the true Dhamma will vanish.  

7.4 Therefore, preserve these teachings. Train yourselves thus."  

8.1 Thus have I heard. The Blessed One dwelled at Vesālī in the Great Wood.  

8.2 The Licchavis used grass pillows, remaining vigilant. Thus King Ajātasattu could not invade.  

8.3 But when they grow soft, using feather pillows and sleeping late, invasion becomes possible.  

8.4 Similarly, monks now stay alert with grass pillows, thwarting Māra.  

8.5 When monks grow indulgent, Māra finds opportunity.  

8.6 Therefore, use grass pillows and remain heedful. Train yourselves thus."  

9.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

9.2 A young monk visited households at improper times. When admonished, he protested: "Do elders alone visit households?"  

9.3 The Blessed One taught: "Elephants properly wash lotus roots before eating, gaining strength. Young elephants eat mud with roots, sicken, and die.  

9.4 Similarly, wise monks receive alms without attachment. But foolish monks cling to offerings, suffering consequences.  

9.5 Therefore, dwell without clinging. Train yourselves thus."  

10.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

10.2 A monk frequented households improperly. Though admonished, he persisted.  

10.3 The Blessed One taught: "A cat waits at a rat hole but dies eating unclean prey.  

10.4 Similarly, monks lacking sense control see scantily clad women and suffer downfall.  

10.5 Disrobing is death in the Dhamma. Sinful contact brings mortal suffering.  

10.6 Therefore, guard body, speech, and mind. Train yourselves thus."  

11.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

11.2 "Monks, hear the sick jackal howling at night?  

11.3 That scabby jackal indulges desires uncurbed.  

11.4 Should Sakyan disciples emulate this?  

11.5 Therefore, dwell heedfully. Train yourselves thus."  

12.1 The Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

12.2 "Monks, that jackal shows gratitude. But some Sakyan disciples lack gratitude.  

12.3 Therefore, be grateful and helpful. Train yourselves thus."  

Summary of Parables:  
Ridgepole, Soil, House, Pot, Blade, Archer, Drum, Grass, Elephant, Cat, Jackals.