7. Factors of Enlightenment  

61. 1. Fetters  

1. At Sāvatthī.  

2. Bhikkhus, when the five faculties are developed and cultivated, they lead to the destruction of the fetters...  

62. 2. Latent Tendencies  

2. ...lead to the abandoning of latent tendencies...  

63. 3. Full Understanding  

2. ...lead to the full understanding of the course...  

64. 4. Destruction of Taints  

2. ...lead to the destruction of the taints.  

3. What are the five faculties? The faculty of faith, the faculty of diligence, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, the faculty of wisdom. Bhikkhus, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated, they lead to the destruction of the fetters... abandoning of latent tendencies... full understanding of the course... destruction of the taints.  

65. 5. Fruits (1)  

2. Bhikkhus, there are five faculties. What are the five? The faculty of faith, the faculty of diligence, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, the faculty of wisdom. These are the five faculties.  

3. When these five faculties are developed and cultivated, one of two fruits may be expected: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue of clinging, the state of non-returning.  

66. 6. Fruits (2)  

2. Bhikkhus, there are five faculties. What are the five? The faculty of faith, the faculty of diligence, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, the faculty of wisdom. These are the five faculties.  

3. When these five faculties are developed and cultivated, seven fruits and seven benefits may be expected. What are the seven?  

4. One attains final knowledge in this very life. If one does not attain final knowledge in this very life, one attains it at the time of death. If one does not attain final knowledge in this very life or at death, then with the destruction of the five lower fetters, one becomes an attainer of antarāparinibbāyī. If not, one becomes an attainer of upahaccaparinibbāyī. If not, one becomes an attainer of asaṅkhāraparinibbāyī. If not, one becomes an attainer of sasaṅkhāraparinibbāyī. If not, one becomes an attainer of uddhaṃsoto, destined for the Akaniṭṭha realm.  

Bhikkhus, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated, these seven fruits and seven benefits may be expected.  

67. 7. Trees (1)  

2. Bhikkhus, just as among the trees of Jambudīpa, the roseapple tree is declared supreme, so among the factors conducive to enlightenment, the faculty of wisdom is declared supreme for attaining enlightenment.  

3. What are the factors conducive to enlightenment? The faculty of faith is a factor conducive to enlightenment. The faculty of diligence... mindfulness... concentration... wisdom is a factor conducive to enlightenment.  

Just as among the trees of Jambudīpa, the roseapple tree is declared supreme, so among the factors conducive to enlightenment, the faculty of wisdom is declared supreme.  

68. 8. Trees (2)  

2. Bhikkhus, just as among the trees of the Tāvatiṃsa devas, the coral tree is declared supreme, so among the factors conducive to enlightenment, the faculty of wisdom is declared supreme.  

3. What are the factors conducive to enlightenment? The faculty of faith... (as above)...  

Just as among the trees of the Tāvatiṃsa devas, the coral tree is declared supreme, so among the factors conducive to enlightenment, the faculty of wisdom is declared supreme.  

69. 9. Trees (3)  

2. Bhikkhus, just as among the trees of the asuras, the silk-cotton tree is declared supreme, so among the factors conducive to enlightenment, the faculty of wisdom is declared supreme.  

3. What are the factors conducive to enlightenment? The faculty of faith... (as above)...  

Just as among the trees of the asuras, the silk-cotton tree is declared supreme, so among the factors conducive to enlightenment, the faculty of wisdom is declared supreme.  

70. 10. Trees (4)  

2. Bhikkhus, just as among the trees of the garuḍas, the kola tree is declared supreme, so among the factors conducive to enlightenment, the faculty of wisdom is declared supreme.  

3. What are the factors conducive to enlightenment? The faculty of faith... (as above)...  

Just as among the trees of the garuḍas, the kola tree is declared supreme, so among the factors conducive to enlightenment, the faculty of wisdom is declared supreme.  

End of the Seventh Chapter, "Factors of Enlightenment."  

Its summary verses:  

Fetters and latent tendencies,  
Full understanding and destruction of taints,  
Two fruits and four trees:  
These are declared in this chapter.