1. Purity  

1.1. First: Purity  

1.2. At Sāvatthī. ... There the Blessed One said this:  

3. "Monks, there are five faculties. What five? The faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty. Monks, these are the five faculties."  

1.2. Second: Stream-Enterer (1)  

※3. "Monks, there are five faculties. What five? The faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.  

4. Monks, because a noble disciple understands as it really is the gratification, danger, and escape regarding these five faculties, this noble disciple is called a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the lower realms, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as their goal."  

1.3. Third: Stream-Enterer (2)  

※3. "Monks, there are five faculties. What five? The faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.  

4. Monks, because a noble disciple understands as it really is the origin, cessation, gratification, danger, and escape regarding these five faculties, this noble disciple is called a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the lower realms, fixed in destiny, with enlightenment as their goal."  

1.4. Fourth: Arahant (1)  

※2. "Monks, there are five faculties. What five? The faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.  

3. Monks, when a monk understands as it really is the gratification, danger, and escape regarding these five faculties, and is liberated through non-clinging, this monk is called an arahant—one whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, attained the goal, destroyed the fetters of existence, and is liberated through perfect knowledge."  

1.5. Fifth: Arahant (2)  

※2. "Monks, there are five faculties. What five? The faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.  

3. Monks, when a monk understands as it really is the origin, cessation, gratification, danger, and escape regarding these five faculties, and is liberated through non-clinging, this monk is called an arahant—one whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, attained the goal, destroyed the fetters of existence, and is liberated through perfect knowledge."  

1.6. Sixth: Ascetics and Brahmins (1)  

※2. "Monks, there are five faculties. What five? The faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.  

3. Monks, any ascetics or brahmins who do not understand as it really is the origin, cessation, gratification, danger, and escape regarding these five faculties—these I do not regard as true ascetics among ascetics or brahmins among brahmins. Those venerables do not, in this very life, realize and dwell in the goal of asceticism or brahminhood through their own direct knowledge.  

4. Monks, any ascetics or brahmins who do understand as it really is the origin, cessation, gratification, danger, and escape regarding these five faculties—these I regard as true ascetics among ascetics and brahmins among brahmins. Those venerables do, in this very life, realize and dwell in the goal of asceticism or brahminhood through their own direct knowledge."  

1.7. Seventh: Ascetics and Brahmins (2)  

※3. "Monks, any ascetics or brahmins who do not know the faith faculty, its origin, cessation, or the path leading to its cessation; who do not know the energy faculty ... the mindfulness faculty ... the concentration faculty ... the wisdom faculty, its origin, cessation, or the path leading to its cessation—these I do not recognize as ascetics among ascetics or brahmins among brahmins. Those venerables do not, in this very life, realize and dwell in the goal of asceticism or brahminhood through their own direct knowledge.  

4. But, monks, any ascetics or brahmins who do know the faith faculty ... (similarly for energy, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom) ... these I recognize as true ascetics among ascetics and brahmins among brahmins. Those venerables do, in this very life, realize and dwell in the goal of asceticism or brahminhood through their own direct knowledge."  

1.8. Eighth: Where to Observe  

※2. "Monks, there are five faculties. What five? The faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.  

3. Where should the faith faculty be seen? The four factors of stream-entry should be seen here.  

4. Where should the energy faculty be seen? The four right efforts should be seen here.  

5. Where should the mindfulness faculty be seen? The four establishments of mindfulness should be seen here.  

6. Where should the concentration faculty be seen? The four jhānas should be seen here.  

7. Where should the wisdom faculty be seen? The Four Noble Truths should be seen here.  

8. These, monks, are the five faculties."  

1.9. Ninth: Explanation (1)  

※2. "Monks, there are five faculties. What five? The faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.  

3. What is the faith faculty? Here, a noble disciple has faith, grounded in the Tathāgata’s awakening: 'The Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened one, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the faith faculty.  

4. What is the energy faculty? Here, a noble disciple rouses energy, striving to abandon unwholesome qualities and embrace wholesome qualities, strong, firm, and persevering, not shirking the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities. This is called the energy faculty.  

5. What is the mindfulness faculty? Here, a noble disciple is mindful, possessing supreme mindfulness and alertness, remembering and recollecting what was done and said long ago. This is called the mindfulness faculty.  

6. What is the concentration faculty? Here, a noble disciple gains concentration, gains unification of mind, having liberation as the object. This is called the concentration faculty.  

7. What is the wisdom faculty? Here, a noble disciple has wisdom, noble and penetrative, leading to the complete destruction of suffering, possessing the knowledge of arising and passing away. This is called the wisdom faculty."  

1.10. Tenth: Explanation (2)  

※2. "Monks, there are five faculties. What five? The faith faculty, the energy faculty, the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom faculty.  

3. What is the faith faculty? ... (as in 1.9.3) ...  

4. What is the energy faculty? Here, a noble disciple rouses energy ... (as in 1.9.4) ... He generates desire, effort, persistence, and exertion to prevent unarisen unwholesome states and to abandon arisen unwholesome states; to generate unarisen wholesome states and to maintain arisen wholesome states. This is called the energy faculty.  

5. What is the mindfulness faculty? Here, a noble disciple dwells contemplating the body in the body ... feelings ... mind ... phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having subdued worldly longing and dejection. This is called the mindfulness faculty.  

6. What is the concentration faculty? Here, a noble disciple ... attains the first jhāna ... second ... third ... fourth jhāna. This is called the concentration faculty.  

7. What is the wisdom faculty? Here, a noble disciple understands as it really is: 'This is suffering ... origin ... cessation ... path.' This is called the wisdom faculty.  

8. These, monks, are the five faculties."  

End of the First Chapter: Purity  


Summary Verses:  

Purity, two on stream-enterers,  
Two on arahants,  
Ascetics and brahmins (two),  
Observing, two explanations.