2. The Section of Abbreviation 2  
(Anuruddha 2, White Portion)  

※2  
At that time, Venerable Anuruddha approached the Blessed One’s dwelling...  

3  
Seated to one side, Venerable Anuruddha said to the Blessed One: "Venerable Sir, here, with a purified divine eye surpassing that of humans, I see women who, after passing away and breaking up of the body, are reborn in happy destinations, in heavenly realms. Venerable Sir, how many qualities must a woman possess to be reborn in happy destinations, in heavenly realms after the breakup of the body?"  

[15] First: Free from Anger  

※4  
"Anuruddha, a woman endowed with five qualities, upon the breakup of the body after death, is reborn in a happy destination, in a heavenly realm. What are these five qualities?  

5  
She has faith, moral shame, moral dread, is free from anger, and is wise.  

6  
Anuruddha, a woman endowed with these five qualities, upon the breakup of the body after death, is reborn in a happy destination, in a heavenly realm."  

[16] Second: Free from Hatred  

※4  
"Anuruddha, a woman endowed with five qualities... free from hatred, and is wise.  

6  
...is reborn in a happy destination, in a heavenly realm."  

[17] Third: Free from Jealousy  

※4  
"...free from jealousy, and is wise."  

[18] Fourth: Free from Stinginess  

※5  
"...free from stinginess, and is wise."  

[19] Fifth: Free from Wrong Conduct  

※5  
"...free from wrong conduct, and is wise."  

[20] Sixth: Observes Precepts  

※5  
"...observes the precepts, and is wise."  

[21] Seventh: Learned  

※5  
"...is learned, and is wise."  

[22] Eighth: Energetic  

※5  
"...is energetic, and is wise."  

[23] Ninth: Mindful  

※5  
"...is mindful, and is wise.  

6  
Anuruddha, a woman endowed with these five qualities... heavenly realm."  

[24] Tenth: Five Precepts  

※5  
"Anuruddha, a woman endowed with five qualities... heavenly realm. What are the five? She abstains from killing living beings, stealing, sexual misconduct, false speech, and consuming intoxicants like liquor and wine that cause heedlessness.  

6  
Anuruddha, a woman endowed with these five qualities... heavenly realm."  

End of the Second Section of Abbreviation.  

The summary verses state:  

Agreeable and disagreeable,  
Specific to Anuruddha:  
Anger, hatred, jealousy, stinginess,  
Wrong conduct, deficient observance,  
Unlearned, lazy,  
Forgetfulness, and five abstentions  
Are declared in the Black Portion.  
In Anuruddha: free from anger,  
Free from hatred and jealousy,  
Stinginess, wrong conduct;  
Learned, precept-keeping,  
Energetic, mindful, five precepts  
Are declared in the White Portion.