5. The Householder Chapter  

41. First: The Five Fearful Crimes (1)  

1.1. [At one time the Blessed One] was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

1.2. Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. The Blessed One said to him:  

1.3. "Householder, when a noble disciple has stilled the five fearful crimes, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has seen and penetrated the Noble Dhamma with wisdom, then—if he wishes—he can declare of himself: 'For me, hell is destroyed; animal rebirth is destroyed; the realm of hungry ghosts is destroyed; all states of loss, bad destinations, and lower realms are destroyed. I am a stream-enterer, no longer bound to the lower worlds, firmly fixed, destined for enlightenment.'  

1.4. What are the five fearful crimes that are stilled?  

1.5. Householder, one who destroys life—due to destroying life, he experiences fear and blame in the present life and in future lives, and he experiences mental distress and grief. By abstaining from destroying life, that fear and blame are stilled.  

1.6. Householder, one who takes what is not given—due to taking what is not given, he experiences fear and blame in the present life and in future lives... By abstaining from taking what is not given, that fear and blame are stilled.  

1.7. Householder, one who engages in sexual misconduct—due to sexual misconduct... By abstaining from sexual misconduct, that fear and blame are stilled.  

1.8. Householder, one who speaks falsely—due to false speech... By abstaining from false speech, that fear and blame are stilled.  

1.9. Householder, one who indulges in intoxicants—due to indulging in intoxicants... By abstaining from intoxicants, that fear and blame are stilled. These are the five fearful crimes that are stilled.  

2.10. What are the four factors of stream-entry that he possesses?  

2.11. Householder, here a noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha: 'The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.'  

2.12. He possesses unwavering confidence in the Dhamma: 'The Dhamma is well-expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.'  

2.13. He possesses unwavering confidence in the Sangha: 'The Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way—that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals. This Sangha is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of respectful salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.'  

2.14. He possesses the virtuous behavior praised by the noble ones—unbroken, unflawed, unblemished, unclouded, liberating, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration. These are the four factors of stream-entry.  

2.15. What is seeing and penetrating the Noble Dhamma with wisdom?  

2.16. Householder, here a noble disciple wisely attends to dependent origination: 'When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises. When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with the cessation of this, that ceases.'  

2.17. That is: With ignorance as condition, formations arise; with formations as condition, consciousness arises... Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. With the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance, formations cease; with the cessation of formations, consciousness ceases... Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

2.18. Householder, when a noble disciple has stilled these five fearful crimes, possesses these four factors of stream-entry, and has seen and penetrated the Noble Dhamma with wisdom—then, if he wishes, he can declare of himself: 'For me, hell is destroyed... destined for enlightenment.'"  

42. Second: The Five Fearful Crimes (2)  

2.1. [At one time the Blessed One] was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

2.2. Then several monks approached the Blessed One... The Blessed One said:  

3. "Monks, when a noble disciple has stilled the five fearful crimes, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has seen and penetrated the Noble Dhamma with wisdom, then—if he wishes—he can declare of himself: 'Hell is destroyed... destined for enlightenment.'  

4. What are the five fearful crimes stilled? Monks, one who destroys life... one who takes what is not given... one who engages in sexual misconduct... one who speaks falsely... one who indulges in intoxicants... These five fearful crimes are stilled.  

5. What are the four factors of stream-entry? Here a noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha... the Dhamma... the Sangha... and virtuous behavior praised by the noble ones. These are the four factors.  

6. What is seeing and penetrating the Noble Dhamma with wisdom? A noble disciple wisely attends to dependent origination... Thus he sees and penetrates the Noble Dhamma.  

7. Monks, when a noble disciple has stilled these five crimes... he can declare of himself: 'Hell is destroyed... destined for enlightenment.'"  

43. Third: Suffering  

3.1. [At one time the Blessed One] was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

3.2. "Monks, I will teach you the arising and cessation of suffering. Listen...  

3.3. What is the arising of suffering?  

3.4. Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition, feeling arises. With feeling as condition, craving arises. This is the arising of suffering.  

3.5-3.9. [Similarly for ear-sound, nose-smell, tongue-taste, body-touch, mind-mental phenomena.]  

4.10. What is the cessation of suffering?  

4.11. Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises... With the remainderless fading away and cessation of craving, clinging ceases... Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

4.12-4.16. [Similarly for other sense bases.]  

4.17. This is the cessation of suffering."  

44. Fourth: The World  

4.1. [At one time the Blessed One] was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

4.2. "Monks, I will teach the arising and cessation of the world...  

4.3. What is the arising of the world?  

4.4. Dependent on the eye and forms... With craving as condition, clinging arises... Such is the arising of the world.  

4.5-4.9. [Similarly for other senses.]  

5.10. What is the cessation of the world?  

5.11. Dependent on the eye and forms... With the cessation of craving, clinging ceases... Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

5.12-5.16. [Similarly for other senses.]  

5.17. This is the cessation of the world."  

45. Fifth: Nādika  

5.1. Thus I heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Nādika in the brick house.  

5.2. Then the Blessed One, in seclusion, taught this Dhamma:  

5.3. "Dependent on the eye and forms... Such is the arising of suffering...  

5.9. With the cessation of craving... Such is the cessation of suffering..."  

5.15. A certain monk overheard the Blessed One...  

5.18. "Monk, learn this Dhamma... This Dhamma leads to the fundamentals of the holy life."  

46. Sixth: Different  

6.1. [At one time the Blessed One] was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

6.2. A brahmin asked: "Gotama, is it that one acts and oneself experiences?"  

6.3. "Brahmin, 'one acts and experiences' is one extreme."  

6.4. "Then does another act and another experience?" "That is the second extreme. The Tathāgata teaches the middle way...  

6.5. With ignorance as condition, formations arise... Such is the cessation of suffering."  

6.6. The brahmin became a lay follower.  

47. Seventh: Sūra  

7.1. [At one time the Blessed One] was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  

7.2. The brahmin Sūra asked: "Is everything a being?"  

7.3. "'Everything exists' is one extreme... The Tathāgata teaches dependent origination..."  

7.6. Sūra became a follower.  

48. Eighth: Lokāyatika  

8.1. A materialist brahmin asked about eternalism, nihilism, oneness, and multiplicity.  

8.6. "The Tathāgata teaches the middle way... dependent origination..."  

8.8. The brahmin became a follower.  

49. Ninth: Noble Disciple (1)  

9.1. [At one time the Blessed One said:]  

9.2. "A learned noble disciple does not wonder: 'What exists so that this exists?...'  

9.3. He understands: 'With ignorance as condition, formations arise...'  

9.5. He understands: 'With the cessation of ignorance, formations cease...'  

9.6. Such a disciple has attained the vision of the Dhamma..."  

50. Tenth: Noble Disciple (2)  

10.1. [Similarly expands on the noble disciple's understanding of dependent arising and cessation.]  

End of the Chapter.