Chapter 1. The Māra  

1. First. Affliction  

1. Thus I have heard. At one time, when the Blessed One had first attained supreme enlightenment, he dwelt at Uruvelā by the Nerañjarā River, at the foot of the Ajapāla Nigrodha tree.  

2. At that time, the Blessed One sat alone in meditation and reflected thus: "Truly, I have now been liberated from that asceticism. Excellent! Truly, I have now been liberated from that unprofitable self-mortification. Excellent! I have attained steadfastness, mindfulness, and enlightenment."  

3. Then Māra the Evil One, knowing the Blessed One’s thoughts, approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he addressed the Blessed One in verse:  

"You have not escaped the path of mortification, O pure youth! You hesitate, abandoning purity. Thinking impurity is pure, you stray from the true path."  

4. The Blessed One, recognizing Māra the Evil One, replied in verse:  

"Knowing all asceticism toward immortality is futile, like a boat’s helm on dry land, devoid of benefit, I cultivated virtue, concentration, and wisdom—this is the path to enlightenment. I have reached supreme purity. You are defeated, O Destroyer!"  

5. Then Māra the Evil One, suffering and distressed, said, "The Blessed One knows me! The Sublime One knows me!" And he shrank away and vanished there.  

2. Second. The Elephant  

1. Thus I have heard. At one time, when the Blessed One had first attained supreme enlightenment, he dwelt at Uruvelā by the Nerañjarā River, at the foot of the Ajapāla Nigrodha tree.  

2. At that time, the Blessed One sat in the open during a dark night as drizzling rain fell.  

3. Then Māra the Evil One, wishing to stir terror and make the Blessed One’s hair stand on end, transformed himself into a giant elephant king and approached the Blessed One.  

4. His head was like a massive black boulder, his tusks like pure silver, and his trunk like a massive plow handle.  

5. The Blessed One, recognizing Māra the Evil One, addressed him in verse:  

"You create pure and impure forms—your wandering is long, Māra! Depart, O Destroyer! You are defeated!"  

6. Then Māra the Evil One, suffering and distressed, said, "The Blessed One knows me! The Sublime One knows me!" And he shrank away and vanished there.  

3. Third. Purity  

1. [At that time, the Blessed One] dwelt at Uruvelā...  

2. At that time, the Blessed One sat in the open during a dark night as drizzling rain fell.  

3. Then Māra the Evil One, wishing to stir terror and make the Blessed One’s hair stand on end, approached where the Blessed One was seated.  

4. Having approached, he displayed near the Blessed One various forms—some pure, some impure, some towering, some lowly.  

5. The Blessed One, recognizing Māra the Evil One, addressed him in verse:  

"You create pure and impure forms—your wandering is long, Māra! Depart, O Destroyer! You are defeated! Through body, speech, and mind, those who tame Māra act virtuously. They do not follow evil or become Māra’s disciples."  

6. Then Māra the Evil One... suffering... shrank away and vanished there.  

4. Fourth. Bonds (First)  

1. Thus I have heard. At one time, the Blessed One dwelt at Bārāṇasī in the Deer Park at Isipatana. There, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "O bhikkhus!" The bhikkhus replied, "Venerable Sir!"  

2. The Blessed One said: "O bhikkhus! Through right thought and right effort, I have realized supreme liberation. You too, O bhikkhus, through right thought and right effort, shall realize supreme liberation."  

3. Then Māra the Evil One approached the Blessed One and addressed him in verse:  

"You are bound by Māra’s snares—gods and humans alike. You are fettered by Māra’s ropes; no ascetic can escape me!"  

4. [The Blessed One:] "I am freed from Māra’s snares—gods and humans alike. I have severed Māra’s bonds. You are defeated, O Destroyer!"  

5. Then Māra the Evil One... shrank away and vanished there.  

5. Fifth. Bonds (Second)  

1. At that time, the Blessed One dwelt at Bārāṇasī in the Deer Park at Isipatana. There, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "O bhikkhus!" The bhikkhus replied, "Venerable Sir!"  

2. The Blessed One said: "O bhikkhus! I am liberated from all bonds of gods and humans. You too, O bhikkhus, are liberated from all bonds of gods and humans. O bhikkhus, wander for the welfare and happiness of many, out of compassion for the world, for the benefit of gods and humans. Do not two of you go the same way. O bhikkhus, teach the Dhamma—good in the beginning, middle, and end—in both letter and spirit. Proclaim the perfectly complete and pure holy life. There are beings with little dust in their eyes who will perish through not hearing the Dhamma. They will become knowers of the truth. O bhikkhus, I too will go to teach the Dhamma in the village of Uruvelā."  

3. Then Māra the Evil One approached the Blessed One and addressed him in verse:  

"You are bound by Māra’s snares—gods and humans alike. You are fettered by Māra’s ropes; no ascetic can escape me!"  

4. [The Blessed One:] "I am freed from Māra’s snares—gods and humans alike. I have severed Māra’s bonds. You are defeated, O Destroyer!"  

6. Sixth. The Serpent  

1. Thus I have heard. At one time, the Blessed One dwelt in Rājagaha at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.  

2. At that time, the Blessed One sat in the open during a dark night as drizzling rain fell.  

3. Then Māra the Evil One, wishing to stir terror and make the Blessed One’s hair stand on end, transformed himself into a giant serpent king and approached the Blessed One.  

4. His body was as large as a boat, his head like a winnowing basket, his eyes like Kosala brass bowls, his mouth roaring like thunder, his tongue flickering like lightning, his breath hissing like a blacksmith’s bellows.  

5. The Blessed One, recognizing Māra the Evil One, addressed him in verse:  

"Empty dwellings are mastered by the noble sage. Retreating here, abiding thus—this is fitting. Many pests haunt these wilds—mosquitoes, snakes, and terrors. The great sage dwells in empty huts unshaken. Though the sky might split, the earth quake, and darts strike his chest, the Buddha remains unalarmed."  

6. Then Māra the Evil One said, "The Blessed One knows me! The Sublime One knows me!" And he shrank away and vanished there.  

7. Seventh. Sleep  

1. At that time, the Blessed One dwelt in Rājagaha at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.  

2. At that time, after walking in meditation outdoors most of the night, the Blessed One washed his feet at dawn, entered his dwelling, and lay down mindfully and composed in the lion’s posture.  

3. Then Māra the Evil One approached the Blessed One and addressed him in verse:  

"Why do you sleep? Why slumber now like a corpse? The hut is empty—what is your reason? The sun has risen high. Why do you sleep?"  

4. [The Blessed One:] "I have torn through craving’s net. Nowhere am I bound. All existence is exhausted. Awake, I sleep. What have you to do here, Māra?"  

8. Eighth. Delight  

1. Thus I have heard. At one time, the Blessed One dwelt in Sāvatthī at Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.  

2. Then Māra the Evil One approached the Blessed One and addressed him in verse:  

"Through children one delights in children; through cattle one delights in cattle. A person’s delight lies in attachments. Without attachments, there is no delight."  

3. [The Blessed One:] "Through children one grieves for children; through cattle one grieves for cattle. A person’s grief lies in attachments. Without attachments, there is no grief."  

4. Then Māra the Evil One said, "The Blessed One knows me! The Sublime One knows me!" And he shrank away and vanished there.  

9. Ninth. Lifespan (First)  

1. Thus I have heard. At one time, the Blessed One dwelt in Rājagaha at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.  

2. There, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "O bhikkhus!" The bhikkhus replied, "Venerable Sir!"  

3. The Blessed One said: "O bhikkhus! Human life is brief. One must go to the future. One must do what is wholesome. One must live the holy life. None born is immortal. O bhikkhus! Even those who live long seldom exceed a hundred years."  

4. Then Māra the Evil One approached the Blessed One and addressed him in verse:  

"Life is long for humans. The virtuous need not discard it. Like a suckling child well-fed: death will not approach."  

5. [The Blessed One:] "Life is brief for humans. The virtuous should discard it. Like hair aflame: death will surely come."  

6. Then Māra the Evil One... shrank away and vanished there.  

10. Tenth. Lifespan (Second)  

1. [At that time, the Blessed One] dwelt in Rājagaha...  

The Blessed One said: "O bhikkhus! Human life is brief. One must go to the future. One must do what is wholesome. One must live the holy life. None born is immortal. O bhikkhus! Even those who live long seldom exceed a hundred years."  

2. Then Māra the Evil One approached the Blessed One and addressed him in verse:  

"Days and nights pass not idly. Lifespans do not end. Like a revolving cart wheel, human life spins on."  

3. [The Blessed One:] "Days and nights pass swiftly. Lifespans draw to an end. As small streams dry up, human life diminishes."  

4. Then Māra the Evil One, suffering and distressed, said, "The Blessed One knows me! The Sublime One knows me!" And he shrank away and vanished there.  

Summary:  
Affliction, the elephant, purity, two on bonds, the serpent, sleep, delight, two on lifespan.