4. The Section on Hindrances  

31. The First Good (1)  

2. "O bhikkhus! Whatever qualities are wholesome, partake of the wholesome, and are factors of the wholesome—they are all rooted in heedfulness, converge upon heedfulness, and heedfulness is declared the foremost among them.  

3. O bhikkhus! For a bhikkhu who is heedful, it is to be expected that he will cultivate the seven factors of enlightenment, frequently cultivate the seven factors of enlightenment. O bhikkhus! How does a heedful bhikkhu cultivate the seven factors of enlightenment, frequently cultivate the seven factors of enlightenment?  

4. O bhikkhus! Here, a bhikkhu cultivates the mindfulness enlightenment factor based on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment... [cultivates the discrimination of states enlightenment factor... the effort enlightenment factor... the rapture enlightenment factor... the tranquility enlightenment factor... the concentration enlightenment factor...] cultivates the equanimity enlightenment factor based on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment. O bhikkhus! A heedful bhikkhu thus cultivates the seven factors of enlightenment, frequently cultivates them."  

32. The Second Good (2)  

2. "O bhikkhus! Whatever qualities are wholesome, partake of the wholesome, and are factors of the wholesome—they are all rooted in careful attention, converge upon careful attention, and careful attention is declared the foremost among them.  

3. O bhikkhus! For a bhikkhu who is endowed with careful attention, it is to be expected that he will cultivate the seven factors of enlightenment, frequently cultivate the seven factors of enlightenment. O bhikkhus! How does a bhikkhu endowed with careful attention cultivate the seven factors of enlightenment, frequently cultivate them?  

4. O bhikkhus! Here, a bhikkhu cultivates the mindfulness enlightenment factor based on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment... [cultivates the discrimination of states enlightenment factor... the effort enlightenment factor... the rapture enlightenment factor... the tranquility enlightenment factor... the concentration enlightenment factor...] cultivates the equanimity enlightenment factor based on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment. O bhikkhus! A bhikkhu endowed with careful attention thus cultivates the seven factors of enlightenment, frequently cultivates them."  

33. The Third Defilement (1)  

2. "O bhikkhus! There are five taints of gold. When gold is tainted by these, it is not malleable, unfit for work, not radiant, brittle, and not ready for application. What are the five?  

3. Iron is a taint of gold. When gold is tainted by this, it is not malleable... unfit for application.  

4. Copper is a taint of gold...  

5. Tin is a taint of gold...  

6. Lead is a taint of gold...  

7. Silver is a taint of gold. When gold is tainted by this, it is not malleable... unfit for application.  

8. O bhikkhus! These five are the taints of gold. When tainted by these, gold is not malleable, brittle, and unfit for application. Similarly, O bhikkhus! There are five taints of the mind. When the mind is tainted by these, it is not malleable, unfit for work, not radiant, brittle, and even if rightly directed, cannot destroy the taints. What are the five?  

9. O bhikkhus! Sensual desire is a taint of the mind...  

10. Ill will...  

11. Sloth and torpor...  

12. Restlessness and remorse...  

13. Doubt...  

14. O bhikkhus! These five are the taints of the mind. When the mind is tainted by these, it is not malleable... and cannot rightly destroy the taints."  

34. The Fourth Defilement (2)  

2. "O bhikkhus! The seven factors of enlightenment are without hindrances, without covers, without mental taints. When cultivated and frequently practiced, they lead to the realization of the fruit of true knowledge and liberation. What are the seven?  

3. The mindfulness enlightenment factor... the discrimination of states... the effort... the rapture... the tranquility... the concentration... the equanimity enlightenment factor.  

4. These seven factors of enlightenment... lead to the realization of the fruit of true knowledge and liberation."  

35. The Fifth Proper Consideration (1)  

2. "O bhikkhus! When one attends improperly, unarisen sensual desire arises, and arisen sensual desire increases and expands.  

3. When one attends improperly, unarisen ill will...  

4. Unarisen sloth and torpor...  

5. Unarisen restlessness and remorse...  

6. Unarisen doubt..."  

36. The Sixth Proper Consideration (2)  

2. "O bhikkhus! When one attends properly, the unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor arises, and the arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor reaches full development... [the other six factors likewise]... the unarisen equanimity enlightenment factor arises, and the arisen equanimity enlightenment factor reaches full development."  

37. The Seventh Growth  

2. "O bhikkhus! The seven factors of enlightenment, when cultivated and frequently practiced, lead to growth, not decline. What are the seven?  

3. The mindfulness enlightenment factor... [the others]... the equanimity enlightenment factor.  

4. These seven factors... lead to growth, not decline."  

38. The Eighth Hindrance  

2. "O bhikkhus! There are five hindrances, mental taints that weaken wisdom. What are the five?  

3. Sensual desire is a hindrance... ill will... sloth and torpor... restlessness and remorse... doubt...  

4. These five hindrances... weaken wisdom.  

5. The seven enlightenment factors are without hindrances... [as above].  

6. The mindfulness enlightenment factor...  

7. These seven... realize the fruit of true knowledge and liberation.  

8. O bhikkhus! When a noble disciple is eager, attentive, mindful, and listens to the Dhamma, the five hindrances are absent, and the seven enlightenment factors are fully developed.  

9. Which five are absent? Sensual desire... ill will... sloth... restlessness... doubt...  

10. Which seven are developed? Mindfulness... equanimity enlightenment factors...  

11. Thus, when a noble disciple... the seven factors are fully developed."  

39. The Ninth Tree  

2. "O bhikkhus! A great tree’s seed is tiny, but its trunk grows large, overshadowing other trees, causing them to become stunted, broken, and destroyed.  

3. The asvattha, nigrodha, pilakkha, udumbara, kancana, and kapitthana trees...  

4. Similarly, a person who leaves home but is corrupted by worse than sensual desires...  

5. The five hindrances obscure the mind and weaken wisdom...  

6. The seven enlightenment factors... [as above]... realize the fruit..."  

40. The Tenth Hindrance  

2. "O bhikkhus! Five hindrances cause blindness, loss of vision, ignorance, destruction of wisdom, and lead to ruin, preventing the realization of Nibbāna. Which five?  

3. Sensual desire... ill will... sloth and torpor... restlessness and remorse... doubt...  

4. These five hinder... prevent Nibbāna.  

5. The seven enlightenment factors... [as above]... aid in realizing Nibbāna."  

End of the Section on Hindrances  

Summary verses:  
Two Goods, two Defilements, two Proper Considerations, Growth, Obstacle-Free, Damage-Free, Obstacle as a Cover, Tree, and Hindrance, totaling ten.