2. Connection with Direct Knowledge 1. First: The Fingertip 1. Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapindika’s Park. 2. Then, the Blessed One, having taken a small amount of soil the size of a fingertip’s tip, addressed the monks: "Monks, what do you think? Which is more: the small amount of soil I have taken, or the soil of the great earth?" 3. "Venerable sir, the soil of the great earth is far more. The small amount of soil the Blessed One has taken is insignificant. It does not approach a hundredth part, a thousandth part, or a hundred-thousandth part when compared to the soil of the great earth." 4. "Monks, similarly, for a noble disciple endowed with vision, one who has attained direct knowledge—the suffering that has been destroyed is far greater, while the suffering remaining is minuscule. The suffering destroyed through the extinction of the prior mass of suffering, compared to the suffering remaining (limited to at most seven more lives), does not approach a hundredth part, a thousandth part, or a hundred-thousandth part. 5. Monks, so great is the benefit of obtaining the vision of the Dhamma. So great is the benefit of gaining the Dhamma eye." 2. Second: The Lotus Pond 1. [At that time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.] 2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, suppose there were a lotus pond fifty leagues long, fifty leagues wide, and fifty leagues deep, filled to the brim with water. If someone dipped up water with the tip of a blade of grass—what do you think, monks? Which is more: the water dipped up with the blade’s tip or the water in the lotus pond?" 3. "Venerable sir, the water in the lotus pond is far more. The water dipped up with the blade’s tip is insignificant. It does not approach a hundredth part, a thousandth part, or a hundred-thousandth part when compared to the water in the lotus pond." 4. "Monks, similarly... (as above)... the suffering destroyed... does not approach... 5. Monks, so great is the benefit... (as above)." 3. Third: Converging Rivers (1) 1. [At that time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.] 2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, imagine a person who takes two or three drops of water from the confluence of great rivers—the Ganges, Yamuna, Aciravati, Sarabhu, and Mahi. What do you think, monks? Which is more: these two or three drops or the water in the converging rivers?" 3. "Venerable sir, the water in the converging rivers is far more. The two or three drops are insignificant. They do not approach... (as above)." 4. "Monks, similarly... 4. Fourth: Converging Rivers (2) 1. [At that time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.] 2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, suppose all the water from the Ganges, Yamuna, Aciravati, Sarabhu, and Mahi were to dry up and vanish, leaving only two or three drops. What do you think? Which is more: the vanished water or the remaining drops?" 3. "Venerable sir, the vanished water is far more... (as above)." 4. "Monks, similarly... 5. Fifth: The Earth (1) 1. [At that time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.] 2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, suppose someone placed seven pebbles the size of jujube seeds in one spot on the great earth. What do you think? Which is more: the seven pebbles or the soil of the great earth?" 3. "Venerable sir, the soil of the great earth is far more... (as above)." 4. "Monks, similarly... 6. Sixth: The Earth (2) 1. [At that time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.] 2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, suppose seven pebbles the size of jujube seeds remained after the entire great earth had crumbled to dust. Which is more: the crumbled earth or the remaining pebbles?" 3. "Venerable sir, the crumbled earth is far more... (as above)." 4. "Monks, similarly... 7. Seventh: The Ocean (1) 1. At that time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi. 2. The Blessed One said: "Monks, suppose someone took two or three drops from the ocean. Which is more: those drops or the ocean’s water?" 3. "Venerable sir, the ocean’s water is far more... (as above)." 4. "Monks, similarly... 8. Eighth: The Ocean (2) 1. [At that time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.] 2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, suppose the entire ocean dried up except for two or three drops. Which is more: the dried-up water or the remaining drops?" 3. "Venerable sir, the dried-up water is far more... (as above)." 4. "Monks, similarly... 9. Ninth: The Mountain (1) 1. [At that time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.] 2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, suppose someone placed seven mustard-seed-sized pebbles on the Himalayas. Which is more: those pebbles or the mountain?" 3. "Venerable sir, the Himalayan mountain is far more... (as above)." 4. "Monks, similarly... 10. Tenth: The Mountain (2) 1. [At that time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.] 2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, suppose seven mustard-seed-sized pebbles remained after the Himalayas had crumbled to dust. Which is more: the crumbled mountain or the pebbles?" 3. "Venerable sir, the crumbled mountain is far more... (as above)." 4. "Monks, similarly...For a noble disciple endowed with vision... (as above)...does not approach... 5. Monks, so great is the benefit... (as above)." 11. Eleventh: The Mountain (3) 1. [At that time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.] 2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, suppose someone placed seven mung-bean-sized pebbles on Mount Sineru. Which is more: those pebbles or the mountain?" 3. "Venerable sir, Mount Sineru is far more... (as above)." 4. "Monks, similarly, whatever gains attainments by ascetics, brahmins, or wanderers of other sects do not approach a hundredth part... compared to a noble disciple endowed with vision. 5. Monks, so great is the attainment of vision. So great is the supreme knowledge." 

*The verses summarize: The fingertip, lotus pond, two converging rivers, two earths, two oceans, three mountains.*