9. Elaboration on Raw Grains (3)  

[81] First. Dancing  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from dancing, singing, music, and watching performances are few, while those who do not abstain from dancing, singing, music, and watching performances are many... and so on..."  

[82] Second. Bed  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from high beds and large beds are few, while those who do not abstain from high beds and large beds are many... and so on..."  

[83] Third. Silver  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from accepting gold and silver are few, while those who do not abstain from accepting gold and silver are many... and so on..."  

[84] Fourth. Grains  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from accepting raw grains are few, while those who do not abstain from accepting raw grains are many... and so on..."  

[85] Fifth. Meat  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from accepting raw meat are few, while those who do not abstain from accepting raw meat are many... and so on..."  

[86] Sixth. Maidens  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from accepting women and maidens are few, while those who do not abstain from accepting women and maidens are many... and so on..."  

[87] Seventh. Slaves  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from accepting male and female slaves are few, while those who do not abstain from accepting male and female slaves are many... and so on..."  

[88] Eighth. Goats and Sheep  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from accepting goats and sheep are few, while those who do not abstain from accepting goats and sheep are many... and so on..."  

[89] Ninth. Chickens and Pigs  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from accepting chickens and pigs are few, while those who do not abstain from accepting chickens and pigs are many... and so on..."  

[90] Tenth. Elephants  
4. "Bhikkhus! Thus, beings who abstain from accepting elephants, cattle, horses, and mules are few, while those who do not abstain from accepting elephants, cattle, horses, and mules are many... and so on..."  

9. Elaboration on Raw Grains (3) (End)  

Here is the summary verse:  
Dancing and bed, silver,  
Grains, meat, and maidens,  
Slaves, goats and sheep,  
Chickens, pigs, and elephants.