5. The Wheel-Turning Chapter  

[41] 1. The Category  

1. At Savatthi.  

2. "Bhikkhus, in the past, all ascetics and brahmins who eliminated the three categories cultivated and frequently practiced the Seven Factors of Enlightenment. Bhikkhus, in the future, all ascetics and brahmins who eliminate the three categories will cultivate and frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment. Bhikkhus, in the present, all ascetics and brahmins who eliminate the three categories cultivate and frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment.  

3. What are the Seven Factors of Enlightenment? They are: the enlightenment factor of mindfulness, [the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, the enlightenment factor of effort, the enlightenment factor of joy, the enlightenment factor of tranquility, the enlightenment factor of concentration,] and the enlightenment factor of equanimity.  

4. Bhikkhus, in the past, all ascetics and brahmins who eliminated the three categories... who eliminated... who eliminated... cultivated and frequently practiced the Seven Factors of Enlightenment."  

[42] 2. The Wheel-Turning  

2. "Bhikkhus, when a wheel-turning monarch arises, seven treasures appear. What are these seven?  

3. The wheel treasure, the elephant treasure, the horse treasure, the jewel treasure, the woman treasure, the householder treasure, and the counselor treasure. Bhikkhus, when a wheel-turning monarch arises, these seven treasures appear.  

4. Bhikkhus, when a Tathagata, an Arhat, a Perfectly Enlightened One arises, seven treasures of enlightenment factors appear. What are these seven?  

5. The treasure of the enlightenment factor of mindfulness, [the treasure of the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, the treasure of the enlightenment factor of effort, the treasure of the enlightenment factor of joy, the treasure of the enlightenment factor of tranquility, the treasure of the enlightenment factor of concentration,] up to the treasure of the enlightenment factor of equanimity. Bhikkhus, when a Tathagata, an Arhat, a Perfectly Enlightened One arises, these seven treasures of enlightenment factors appear."  

[43] 3. Mara  

2. "Bhikkhus, I will teach you the path to crush the armies of Mara. Listen attentively. 3. Bhikkhus, what is the path to crush the armies of Mara? It is the Seven Factors of Enlightenment. What are these seven? The enlightenment factor of mindfulness, [the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, the enlightenment factor of effort, the enlightenment factor of joy, the enlightenment factor of tranquility, the enlightenment factor of concentration,] and the enlightenment factor of equanimity. Bhikkhus, this is the path to crush the armies of Mara."  

[44] 4. The Foolish  

2. Then a bhikkhu approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, that bhikkhu said to the Blessed One:  

3. "Venerable Sir, it is said, 'foolish, mute sheep; foolish, mute sheep.' Venerable Sir, how is one called a foolish, mute sheep?"  

4. "Bhikkhu, one who does not cultivate or frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment is called a foolish, mute sheep. What are these seven? The enlightenment factor of mindfulness, [the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, the enlightenment factor of effort, the enlightenment factor of joy, the enlightenment factor of tranquility, the enlightenment factor of concentration,] and the enlightenment factor of equanimity.  

5. Bhikkhu, one who does not cultivate or frequently practice these Seven Factors of Enlightenment is called a foolish, mute sheep."  

[45] 5. The Wise  

3. "Venerable Sir, it is said, 'wise, not mute; wise, not mute.' Venerable Sir, how is one called wise, not mute?"  

4. "Bhikkhu, one who cultivates and frequently practices the Seven Factors of Enlightenment is called wise, not mute. What are these seven? The enlightenment factor of mindfulness, [the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, the enlightenment factor of effort, the enlightenment factor of joy, the enlightenment factor of tranquility, the enlightenment factor of concentration,] and the enlightenment factor of equanimity.  

5. Bhikkhu, because he cultivates and frequently practices these Seven Factors of Enlightenment, he is called wise, not mute."  

[46] 6. The Destitute  

3. "Venerable Sir, it is said, 'destitute; destitute.' Venerable Sir, how is one called destitute?"  

4. "Bhikkhu, one who does not cultivate or frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment is called destitute. What are these seven? The enlightenment factor of mindfulness, [the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, the enlightenment factor of effort, the enlightenment factor of joy, the enlightenment factor of tranquility, the enlightenment factor of concentration,] and the enlightenment factor of equanimity.  

5. Bhikkhu, one who does not cultivate or frequently practice these Seven Factors of Enlightenment is called destitute."  

[47] 7. The Non-Destitute  

3. "Venerable Sir, it is said, 'non-destitute; non-destitute.' Venerable Sir, how is one called non-destitute?"  

4. "Bhikkhu, because he cultivates and frequently practices the Seven Factors of Enlightenment, he is called non-destitute. What are these seven? The enlightenment factor of mindfulness, [the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, the enlightenment factor of effort, the enlightenment factor of joy, the enlightenment factor of tranquility, the enlightenment factor of concentration,] and the enlightenment factor of equanimity.  

5. Bhikkhu, because he cultivates and frequently practices these Seven Factors of Enlightenment, he is called non-destitute."  

[48] 8. The Sun Disk  

2. "Bhikkhus, when the sun disk rises, the precursor sign is the dawn. Bhikkhus, similarly, when a bhikkhu arises to the Seven Factors of Enlightenment, the precursor sign is a good friend.  

3. Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who has a good friend may be expected to cultivate and frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment. Bhikkhus, how does a bhikkhu with a good friend cultivate and frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment?  

4. Bhikkhus, here a bhikkhu cultivates the enlightenment factor of mindfulness... [the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena... the enlightenment factor of effort... the enlightenment factor of joy... the enlightenment factor of tranquility... the enlightenment factor of concentration]... and cultivates the enlightenment factor of equanimity, dependent on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, ripening in relinquishment. Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu with a good friend thus cultivates and frequently practices the Seven Factors of Enlightenment."  

[49] 9. Factors (1)  

2. "Bhikkhus, among internal factors, there is no other single factor that leads to the arising of the Seven Factors of Enlightenment like this one, bhikkhus: careful attention.  

3. Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu accomplished in careful attention may be expected to cultivate and frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment. Bhikkhus, how does a bhikkhu accomplished in careful attention cultivate and frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment?  

4. Bhikkhus, here a bhikkhu cultivates the enlightenment factor of mindfulness... [the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena... the enlightenment factor of effort... the enlightenment factor of joy... the enlightenment factor of tranquility... the enlightenment factor of concentration]... and cultivates the enlightenment factor of equanimity, dependent on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, ripening in relinquishment.  

5. Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu accomplished in careful attention thus cultivates and frequently practices the Seven Factors of Enlightenment."  

[50] 10. Factors (2)  

2. "Bhikkhus, among external factors, there is no other single factor that leads to the arising of the Seven Factors of Enlightenment like this one, bhikkhus: a good friend.  

3. Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who has a good friend may be expected to cultivate and frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment. Bhikkhus, how does a bhikkhu with a good friend cultivate and frequently practice the Seven Factors of Enlightenment?  

4. Bhikkhus, here a bhikkhu cultivates the enlightenment factor of mindfulness... [the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena... the enlightenment factor of effort... the enlightenment factor of joy... the enlightenment factor of tranquility... the enlightenment factor of concentration]... and cultivates the enlightenment factor of equanimity, dependent on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, ripening in relinquishment. Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu with a good friend thus cultivates and frequently practices the Seven Factors of Enlightenment."  

5. The Wheel-Turning Chapter (End)  

The recitation summary of this chapter:  

The category, wheel-turning, Mara, foolish, wise, destitute, non-destitute, sun disk, two factors—these make ten in total.