3. The Householder Section  

124. 1. Vesālī  

1. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the Great Wood, in the Hall with the Peaked Roof.  

2. Then the householder Ugga of Vesālī approached the Blessed One...  

3. Seated to one side, Ugga of Vesālī said to the Blessed One: “Venerable Sir, why is it that some beings here do not attain Nibbāna in this very life? And why is it that some beings here do attain Nibbāna in this very life?”  

4. “Householder, when a monk delights in, welcomes, and persists clinging to forms cognizable by the eye that are pleasing, lovely, agreeable, delightful, arousing desire, then his consciousness becomes dependent on this and clings to it. A monk with clinging does not attain Nibbāna.  

5–9. (Similarly for sounds, smells, tastes, tactile sensations, and mental phenomena.)  

10. Householder, it is for this reason that some beings here do not attain Nibbāna in this very life.  

11–16. But if a monk does not delight in, welcome, or cling to forms... mental phenomena, his consciousness does not become dependent on this or cling to it. A monk without clinging attains Nibbāna.  

17. Householder, it is for this reason that some beings here do attain Nibbāna in this very life.”  

125. 2. Bhaddiya  

1. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling among the Bhaddiya people in the Bhaddiya settlement.  

2. Then the householder Ugga of Bhaddiya approached the Blessed One...  

3. (Full text parallels the previous sutta, concluding:)  

17. “Householder, it is for this reason that some beings here attain Nibbāna in this very life.”  

126. 3. Nāḷandā  

1. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Nāḷandā in Pāvārika’s mango grove.  

2. Then the householder Upāli approached the Blessed One...  

3–17. (Text parallels previous structure, concluding with the same principle.)  

127. 4. Bhāradvāja  

1. At one time the Venerable Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.  

2–17. (Dialogue between King Udena and Piṇḍola regarding restraint of senses and body contemplation, concluding with the king’s conversion.)  

128. 5. Soṇa  

1. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.  

2–17. (Parallel to sutta 124, concluding:) “Soṇa, it is for this reason that some beings here attain Nibbāna in this very life.”  

129. 6. Kosala  

1. At one time the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.  

2–10. (Explanation of diverse elements leading to diverse contacts and feelings.)  

130. 7. Hāliddikāni  

1. At one time the Venerable Mahākaccāna was dwelling among the Kuraraghara hills in Avanti.  

2–10. (Detailed exposition of how diverse sense bases lead to diverse contacts and feelings.)  

131. 8. Nakula’s Father  

1–17. (Parallel structure to previous suttas regarding sense restraint and Nibbāna.)  

132. 9. Roja  

1–25. (Encounter between Mahākaccāna and Roja’s disciples, including verses on ancient Brahmin virtues and proper sense restraint.)  

133. 10. Veṇūkapanthaka  

1–18. (Uppalavaṇṇā’s dialogue with Ven. Udayī about the basis for pleasure and pain, concluding in her conversion.)  

End of the Householder Section.  

Summary Verses:  
Vesālī, Bhaddiya,  
Nālandā, Bhāradvāja,  
Soṇa, Kosala,  
Hāliddikāni, Nakula’s father,  
Roja, Veṇūkapanthaka,  
And the Brahmin woman.