2. Deer Net Chapter  
[63] 1. Deer Net (1)  
1. Thus have I heard. At one time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī.  
2. At that time, the Venerable Migasāla approached the Blessed One’s dwelling...  
3. Seated to one side, the Venerable Migasāla said to the Blessed One: “Venerable Sir, it is said, ‘One who dwells alone, one who dwells alone.’ How, Venerable Sir, is one a solitary dweller, and how is one a dweller with companions?”  
4. “Migasāla, there are forms cognizable by the eye—agreeable, pleasing, charming, endearing, enticing, and arousing desire. If a bhikkhu delights in them, praises them, and clings to them, and thus dwells delighting, praising, and clinging to them, then pleasure arises in him. With the arising of pleasure, there arises passion. With passion, there is bondage. Migasāla, a bhikkhu bound by delight and fettered thus is called a dweller with companions.  
5–8. Migasāla, there are sounds cognizable by the ear... smells cognizable by the nose... tastes cognizable by the tongue... tactile objects cognizable by the body...  
9. Migasāla, there are mental phenomena cognizable by the mind—agreeable, pleasing, charming, endearing, enticing, and arousing desire. If a bhikkhu delights in them, praises them, and clings to them, and thus dwells delighting, praising, and clinging to them, then pleasure arises in him. With the arising of pleasure, there arises passion. With passion, there is bondage. Migasāla, a bhikkhu bound by delight and fettered thus is called a dweller with companions.  
10. Migasāla, even if such a bhikkhu dwells in a forest, a remote lodging, silent, undisturbed, secluded from people, suitable for solitude, he is still called a dweller with companions.  
11. Why? Because craving is his second companion, which he has not abandoned. Thus he is called a dweller with companions.  
12–17. Migasāla, there are forms cognizable by the eye—agreeable, pleasing, charming, endearing, enticing, and arousing desire. If a bhikkhu does not delight in them, does not praise them, and does not cling to them, then pleasure ceases in him. With the cessation of pleasure, passion ceases. With the cessation of passion, bondage ceases. Migasāla, a bhikkhu liberated from the fetter of delight is called a solitary dweller.  
18. Migasāla, even if such a bhikkhu dwells in a village crowded with bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male and female lay followers, kings, royal ministers, ascetics, and disciples of ascetics, he is still called a solitary dweller.  
19. Why? Because craving, his second companion, has been abandoned. Thus he is called a solitary dweller.”  

[64] 2. Deer Net (2)  
2. At that time, the Venerable Migasāla approached the Blessed One’s dwelling...  
3. Seated to one side, he said to the Blessed One: “Venerable Sir, may the Blessed One teach me the Dhamma in brief. Having heard it, I will dwell alone, secluded, diligent, ardent, and resolute.”  
4–8. “Migasāla, there are forms cognizable by the eye—agreeable, pleasing, charming, endearing, enticing, and arousing desire. If a bhikkhu delights in them, praises them, and clings to them, then pleasure arises in him. Migasāla, I say that with the arising of pleasure, suffering arises. There are sounds cognizable by the ear... smells cognizable by the nose... tastes cognizable by the tongue... tactile objects cognizable by the body...  
9. Migasāla, there are mental phenomena cognizable by the mind—agreeable, pleasing, charming, endearing, enticing, and arousing desire. If a bhikkhu delights in them, praises them, and clings to them, then pleasure arises in him. Migasāla, I say that with the arising of pleasure, suffering arises.  
10–14. Migasāla, there are forms cognizable by the eye... If a bhikkhu does not delight in them, does not praise them, and does not cling to them, then pleasure ceases. Migasāla, I say that with the cessation of pleasure, suffering ceases...  
15. Migasāla, there are mental phenomena cognizable by the mind... If a bhikkhu does not delight in them, does not praise them, and does not cling to them, then pleasure ceases. Migasāla, I say that with the cessation of pleasure, suffering ceases.”  
16. Then the Venerable Migasāla, rejoicing in the Blessed One’s words, rose from his seat, paid homage, and departed.  
17. Dwelling alone, secluded, diligent, ardent, and resolute, he soon realized the supreme goal of the holy life. He directly knew: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what was to be done has been done; there is no further becoming.”  
18. Thus the Venerable Migasāla became one of the arahants.  

[65] 3. Sāmisā (1)  
1. Thus have I heard. At one time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove.  
2–3. Then the Venerable Sāmisā approached the Blessed One... and asked: “Venerable Sir, what is called ‘Māra,’ and what is the meaning of ‘Māra’?”  
4–8. “Sāmisā, when there is the eye, forms, eye-consciousness, and things cognizable by the eye—there is Māra or the meaning of Māra. With the ear... nose... tongue... body...  
9. With the mind, mental phenomena, mind-consciousness, and things cognizable by the mind—there is Māra or the meaning of Māra.  
10–14. Sāmisā, when there is no eye, no forms, nothing cognizable by the eye—there is no Māra or meaning of Māra. No ear... nose... tongue... body...  
15. No mind, no mental phenomena, nothing cognizable by the mind—there is no Māra or meaning of Māra.”  

[66] 4. Sāmisā (2)  
3–15. (Similarly regarding “sentient being”...)  

[67] 5. Sāmisā (3)  
3–15. (Similarly regarding “suffering”...)  

[68] 6. Sāmisā (4)  
3. “Venerable Sir, what is called ‘the world,’ and what is the meaning of ‘the world’?”  
4–9. “Sāmisā, when there is the eye, forms, and things cognizable by the eye—that is the world or the meaning of the world... With the ear... nose... tongue... body... mind...  
10–15. When there is no eye... no mind, no mental phenomena... there is no world or meaning of the world.”  

[69] 7. Upasena  
1. At that time, the Venerable Sāriputta and the Venerable Upasena were dwelling at Rājagaha in the Sīta Grove, the Snake’s Head Cave.  
2. Then a venomous snake fell on the Venerable Upasena’s body.  
3. He addressed the bhikkhus: “Come, lift my body on a couch and carry it outside. This body will disintegrate here like a handful of chaff.”  
4. The Venerable Sāriputta said: “But we see no alteration in your body or faculties.”  
5–6. Upasena replied: “Friend Sāriputta, one who says ‘I am the eye’ or ‘This is my eye’... would show alteration. But I do not say thus. Therefore, how could there be alteration?”  
7–9. The bhikkhus carried him out. His body disintegrated like a handful of chaff.  

[70] Upavāṇa  
2–3. Upavāṇa asked the Blessed One: “Venerable Sir, what is the directly visible Dhamma, immediately effective, to be experienced individually by the wise?”  
4–9. “When a bhikkhu knows delight in forms... sounds... smells... tastes... touches... mental phenomena as arising defilement, he directly knows.  
10–15. When he knows absence of delight, the defilement ends. This is the directly visible Dhamma.”  

[71] 9. Six Bases (1)  
2–9. “Bhikkhus, without knowing the six bases’ origin, cessation, allure, danger, and escape, one is far from this Dhamma. If one does not regard the eye... ear... mind as ‘This is mine,’ suffering ends.”  

[72] 10. Six Bases (2)  
2–9. Similar to above, advising detachment.  

[73] 11. Six Bases (3)  
2–9. “Bhikkhus, without knowing... Is the eye permanent or impermanent?... Discerning impermanence, one becomes liberated.”  

End of the Deer Net Chapter.  

Summary:  
Two sutras on Deer Net, four on Sāmisā, Upasena and Upavāṇa, three on Six Bases.