8. Floods  

1.  
At Savatthi.  

171. First - Floods  

2.  
Bhikkhus, there are four kinds of floods. What four? The flood of sensual desire, the flood of existence, the flood of views, and the flood of ignorance. These are the four floods.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these four floods... and to realize it, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

3-33.  
The rest should be expounded in detail as previously.  

172. Second - Yokes  

2-33.  
Bhikkhus, there are four kinds of yokes. What four? The yoke of sensual desire, the yoke of existence, the yoke of views, and the yoke of ignorance. These are the four yokes.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these four yokes... and to realize it, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

173. Third - Clinging  

2-33.  
Bhikkhus, there are four kinds of clinging. What four? Clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging to views, clinging to rituals and vows, and clinging to doctrines of a self. These are the four kinds of clinging.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these four kinds of clinging... and to realize it, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

174. Fourth - Fetters  

2-33.  
Bhikkhus, there are four kinds of bodily fetters. What four? Covetousness is a bodily fetter, ill will is a bodily fetter, clinging to rituals and vows is a bodily fetter, and dogmatic insistence on truth is a bodily fetter. These are the four bodily fetters.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these four bodily fetters... and to realize it, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

175. Fifth - Latent Tendencies  

2-33.  
Bhikkhus, there are seven latent tendencies. What seven? The latent tendency to sensual desire, the latent tendency to aversion, the latent tendency to views, the latent tendency to doubt, the latent tendency to conceit, the latent tendency to craving for existence, and the latent tendency to ignorance. These are the seven latent tendencies.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these seven latent tendencies... and to realize it, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

176. Sixth - Sensual Pleasures  

2-33.  
Bhikkhus, there are five strands of sensual pleasure. What five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, enticing, and bound to passion; sounds cognizable by the ear... odors cognizable by the nose... flavors cognizable by the tongue... touches cognizable by the body that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, enticing, and bound to passion. These are the five strands of sensual pleasure.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these five strands of sensual pleasure... and to realize it, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

177. Seventh - Hindrances  

2-33.  
Bhikkhus, there are five hindrances. What five? The hindrance of sensual desire, the hindrance of ill will, the hindrance of sloth and torpor, the hindrance of restlessness and remorse, and the hindrance of doubt. These are the five hindrances.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these five hindrances... and to realize it, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

178. Eighth - Aggregates Subject to Clinging  

2-33.  
Bhikkhus, there are five aggregates subject to clinging. What five? The form aggregate subject to clinging, the feeling aggregate subject to clinging, the perception aggregate subject to clinging, the volitional formations aggregate subject to clinging, and the consciousness aggregate subject to clinging. These are the five aggregates subject to clinging.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these five aggregates subject to clinging... and to realize it, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

179. Ninth - Lower Fetters  

2-33.  
Bhikkhus, there are five lower fetters. What five? Identity view, doubt, clinging to rituals and vows, sensual desire, and ill will. These are the five lower fetters.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these five lower fetters... and to realize it, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

180. Tenth - Higher Fetters  

2.  
Bhikkhus, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for form, desire for the formless, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five higher fetters.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these five higher fetters, one should cultivate the Noble Eightfold Path. What is the Noble Eightfold Path?  

3-17.  
Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu cultivates right view based on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in relinquishment... right intention... right speech... right action... right livelihood... right effort... right mindfulness... right concentration based on seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in relinquishment.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these five higher fetters, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

Bhikkhus, just as the Ganges River...  

18.  
Bhikkhus, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for form, desire for the formless, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five higher fetters.  

Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these five higher fetters, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path. What is the Noble Eightfold Path?  

19-33.  
Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu thoroughly subdues sensual desire, thoroughly subdues ill will, thoroughly subdues delusion... proceeding to deathlessness, tending toward deathlessness, culminating in deathlessness... inclining toward Nibbāna, leaning toward Nibbāna, entering into Nibbāna, cultivates right view... right intention... right speech... right action... right livelihood... right effort... right mindfulness... right concentration. Bhikkhus, to fully understand... to completely know... to fully exhaust... to abandon these five higher fetters, one should cultivate this Noble Eightfold Path.  

End of Chapter on Floods.  

The summary verses of this chapter:  
Floods, yokes, clinging, fetters,  
Latencies, sensual strands, hindrances,  
Aggregates, lower and upper fetters.  

End of the First Division on the Path.