1. First: The Buddha Chapter [1] First: The Exposition of the Dhamma 1. Thus have I heard. At one time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapiṇḍika’s Park. 2. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus!" "Venerable Sir!" those bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said: "Bhikkhus, I will teach you dependent origination. Listen attentively and carefully. I will speak." "Yes, Venerable Sir," those bhikkhus replied. 3. The Blessed One said: "Bhikkhus, what is dependent origination? With ignorance as condition, there are volitional formations; with volitional formations as condition, there is consciousness; with consciousness as condition, there is name-and-form; with name-and-form as condition, there are the six sense bases; with the six sense bases as condition, there is contact; with contact as condition, there is feeling; with feeling as condition, there is craving; with craving as condition, there is clinging; with clinging as condition, there is existence; with existence as condition, there is birth; with birth as condition, aging-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair arise. Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. Bhikkhus, this is called origination. 4. With the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional formations; with cessation of volitional formations, cessation of consciousness; with cessation of consciousness, cessation of name-and-form; with cessation of name-and-form, cessation of the six sense bases; with cessation of the six sense bases, cessation of contact; with cessation of contact, cessation of feeling; with cessation of feeling, cessation of craving; with cessation of craving, cessation of clinging; with cessation of clinging, cessation of existence; with cessation of existence, cessation of birth; with cessation of birth, aging-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair cease. Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering." 5. When this was said, those bhikkhus rejoiced and delighted in the Blessed One’s words. [2] Second: The Analysis 1. [At one time, the Blessed One] was dwelling at Savatthi... 2. [Then the Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, I will analyze dependent origination for you. Listen attentively and carefully. I will speak." "Yes, Venerable Sir," those bhikkhus replied. 3. The Blessed One said: "Bhikkhus, what is dependent origination? With ignorance as condition, there are volitional formations... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. 4. Bhikkhus, what is aging-and-death? The aging of beings in this or that order of beings—brokenness of teeth, graying hair, wrinkling skin, decline of vitality, impairment of faculties: this is called aging. The passing away of beings from this or that order of beings—their perishing, breakup, disappearance, death, completion of time, breakup of aggregates, laying down of the body: this is called death. Thus this aging and this death are called aging-and-death. 5. Bhikkhus, what is birth? The birth, taking birth, descent, coming-to-be, manifestation of aggregates, acquisition of sense bases of beings in this or that order of beings: this is called birth. 6. Bhikkhus, what is existence? There are three kinds of existence: sense-sphere existence, form existence, and formless existence. This is called existence. 7. Bhikkhus, what is clinging? There are four kinds of clinging: clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging to views, clinging to rituals and observances, clinging to a doctrine of self. This is called clinging. 8. Bhikkhus, what is craving? There are six classes of craving: craving for forms, sounds, smells, tastes, palatable tangibles, and mental phenomena. This is called craving. 9. Bhikkhus, what is feeling? There are six classes of feeling: feeling born of eye-contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, mind-contact. This is called feeling. 10. Bhikkhus, what is contact? There are six classes of contact: eye-contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, mind-contact. This is called contact. 11. Bhikkhus, what are the six sense bases? The eye base, ear base, nose base, tongue base, body base, mind base. This is called the six sense bases. 12. Bhikkhus, what are name-and-form? Feeling, perception, volition, contact, attention: this is called name. The four great elements and the form derived from them: this is called form. Thus this name and this form are called name-and-form. 13. Bhikkhus, what is consciousness? There are six classes of consciousness: eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness, tongue-consciousness, body-consciousness, mind-consciousness. This is called consciousness. 14. Bhikkhus, what are volitional formations? There are three kinds of volitional formations: bodily, verbal, mental. This is called volitional formations. 15. Bhikkhus, what is ignorance? Not knowing suffering, not knowing the origin of suffering, not knowing the cessation of suffering, not knowing the path leading to the cessation of suffering. This is called ignorance. 16. Bhikkhus, thus with ignorance as condition, there are volitional formations... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. Through the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional formations... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering." [3] Third: The Path 1. [At one time, the Blessed One] was dwelling at Savatthi... 2. [Then the Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, I will teach you the wrong path and the right path. Listen attentively and carefully. I will speak." "Yes, Venerable Sir," those bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said: 3. "Bhikkhus, what is the wrong path? With ignorance as condition, there are volitional formations... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. This is called the wrong path. 4. Bhikkhus, what is the right path? Through the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional formations... Thus this whole mass of suffering ceases. This is called the right path." [4] Fourth: Vipassī 1. [At one time, the Blessed One] was dwelling at Savatthi. 2. [Then the Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, before his enlightenment, while still a bodhisatta, the Vipassī Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, thought: 'This world has fallen into suffering: birth, aging, death, passing away, and rebirth. Yet it does not know the escape from this suffering, the escape from aging-and-death. When will there be knowledge of the escape from this suffering, the escape from aging-and-death?' 3. Then, bhikkhus, Vipassī bodhisatta thought: 'With what as condition is there aging-and-death? What conditions aging-and-death?' Then, through wise attention and wisdom, he understood: 'With birth as condition there is aging-and-death. Aging-and-death is conditioned by birth.' 4. Then he thought: 'With what as condition is there birth?...' He understood: 'With existence... clinging... craving... feeling... contact... the six sense bases... name-and-form... consciousness... volitional formations... And what conditions volitional formations?' He understood: 'With ignorance as condition there are volitional formations. Volitional formations are conditioned by ignorance.'... 14. Thus, with ignorance as condition, volitional formations... Thus this whole mass of suffering originates. 15. Then he understood: 'This is origination, origination!' Knowledge arose, vision arose, wisdom arose, understanding arose, light arose. 16. Then he thought: 'When there is no what, is there no aging-and-death? With the cessation of what does aging-and-death cease?' He understood: 'When there is no birth, there is no aging-and-death. With the cessation of birth, aging-and-death ceases.' 17. ... [Similarly for each link in reverse] ... 26. ... With the cessation of ignorance, volitional formations cease... 27. Thus, with the cessation of ignorance... this whole mass of suffering ceases. 28. Then he understood: 'This is cessation, cessation!' Knowledge arose, vision arose, wisdom arose, understanding arose, light arose." [Likewise for the other six Buddhas: Sikhī, Vessabhū, Kakusandha, Koṇāgamana, Kassapa, and the great ascetic Gotama.]