1. Kasyapa Chapter  

1.1 Kasyapa (Part 1)  

1. Thus have I heard. At that time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapindika’s Park.  

Then, in the early dawn, the deva Kasyapa, illuminating the entire Jeta Grove with his radiant light, approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and stood to one side.  

Standing to one side, the deva Kasyapa said to the Blessed One: “Blessed One, please instruct the bhikkhu and us in the bhikkhu’s teaching.”  

2. “Kasyapa, very well! Then I shall explain the things to be aroused.”  

3. “By training in what is subtle, practicing the ascetic life, dwelling alone in a single seat, with a tranquil mind, practice the Dharma.”  

4. Having spoken thus, the deva Kasyapa received the Master’s approval. Knowing that the Master approved, the deva Kasyapa paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him to the right, and vanished from that place.  

1.2 Kasyapa (Part 2)  

1. At that time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi...  

2. Standing to one side, the deva Kasyapa recited this verse in the presence of the Blessed One:  

“A bhikkhu who meditates, attaining liberation of mind, knows the arising and passing of the world. With a mind well-composed, unattached, if he desires the mind’s attainment, he cannot reach its fruit.”  

1.3 Magha  

1. At that time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi...  

2. Then, in the early dawn, the deva Magha, illuminating the entire Jeta Grove with his radiant light, approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage and stood to one side.  

3. Standing to one side, the deva Magha recited this verse to the Blessed One:  

“Killing what, does one sleep blissfully? Killing what, does one not grieve? What one thing, when slain, does the Blessed One praise?”  

4. [The Blessed One:] “Killing anger, one sleeps blissfully. Killing anger, one does not grieve. Devas and humans regard anger as a poisonous root with sweet honey at its tip. The noble ones praise the slaying of anger, for slaying it brings no sorrow.”  

1.4 Magadha  

1. Standing to one side, the deva Magadha recited this verse to the Blessed One:  

“How many lights are there in the world, illuminating the entire world? We ask the Blessed One: How may we know this?”  

2. [The Blessed One:] “There are four lights in the world; a fifth is unknown here. By day, the sun shines; by night, the moon glows. Fire flares both day and night, illuminating all directions. The Awakened One, supreme in glory, is the unsurpassed light.”  

1.5 Tamali  

1. [At that time, the Blessed One] was dwelling at Savatthi...  

2. Then, in the early dawn, the deva Tamali, illuminating the entire Jeta Grove with his radiant light, approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage and stood to one side.  

3. Standing to one side, the deva Tamali recited this verse in the Blessed One’s presence:  

“Strive diligently, without laziness! Abandon sensual desires. By doing so, free from craving, a brahmin may reach beyond existence.”  

4. (The Blessed One said: “Tamali!”)  

“This brahmin has nothing left to do, for all tasks are accomplished. Though a man’s limbs toil, if he lacks a foothold, he is swept away by the current. But one with a firm foothold crosses to the far shore, unmoved by the flow. O deva Tamali, this is the destruction of taints. Skilled in meditation, likened to a brahmin, he reaches the end of birth and decay, standing on the far shore, unswayed by the stream.”  

1.6 Kamada  

1. Standing to one side, the deva Kamada addressed the Blessed One:  

2. “Blessed One, this is difficult to do. Blessed One, this is very hard.”  

(The Blessed One said: “Kamada!”)  

“Difficult it is for those who train, disciplined by virtue, calm and steadfast in the homeless life, to attain joyful contentment.”  

3. “Blessed One, contentment is hard to gain.”  

(The Blessed One said: “Kamada!”)  

“Hard to gain is what the serene-hearted gain, whose minds delight day and night in cultivation.”  

4. “Blessed One, the mind is hard to pacify.”  

(The Blessed One said: “Kamada!”)  

“Hard to pacify are those who pacify the senses. Breaking the net of Death, Kamada, this is the path of the noble ones.”  

5. “Blessed One, this path is rugged and hard to tread.”  

[The Blessed One:] “Though rugged and hard to tread, Kamada, the noble ones walk it joyfully. The ignoble tumble headfirst on the rugged path, but the noble tread evenly, undaunted by roughness or smoothness.”  

1.7 Pancalacanda  

1. Standing to one side, the deva Pancalacanda recited this verse in the Blessed One’s presence:  

“The wise, great in wisdom, discern paths through obstacles. The unattached sage, unmatched, the Buddha knows concentration.”  

2. (The Blessed One said: “Pancalacanda!”)  

“Those who, in the midst of obstacles, reach the deathless Dhamma—attained by the mindful, the well-composed, the peaceful in heart.”  

1.8 Dayana  

1. Then, in the early dawn, the deva Dayana, formerly a teacher of other sects, illuminating the entire Jeta Grove with his radiant light, approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage and stood to one side.  

2. Standing to one side, the deva Dayana recited this verse in the Blessed One’s presence:  

“A brahmin crosses the stream, striving to eradicate craving. A sage who clings to desires does not enter concentration. Do what must be done with diligence! If a renunciant is slack, dust clings more fiercely. Evil deeds yield no victory; pain follows wrong action. Good deeds bring victory, with no trace of suffering. Just as handling poison grass injures the hand, so a monk’s bad conduct drags him to hell. Half-hearted efforts corrupt virtue; doubt in the holy life yields no great fruit.”  

3. Having spoken thus, the deva Dayana paid homage, circumambulated the Blessed One to the right, and vanished.  

4. When the night had passed, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus:  

5. “Bhikkhus, last night the deva Dayana, formerly a teacher of other sects, came to me at dawn. He recited this verse:  

‘A brahmin crosses the stream...’ [as above].  

6. Bhikkhus, learn Dayana’s verses! They are beneficial, belonging to the foremost holy life.”  

1.9 Canda  

1. [At that time, the Blessed One] was dwelling at Savatthi...  

2. Then, when the deva Canda was captured by the Asura king Rahu, he recollected the Blessed One, reciting:  

“Buddha, great hero, I take refuge in you! You are free from all bonds. I am now caught in bondage. Set me in this refuge!”  

3. Then the Blessed One addressed the Asura king Rahu concerning Canda:  

“Canda has taken refuge in the Tathagata, the Worthy One, the Fully Awakened. Rahu, release the moon! The Buddhas have compassion for the world.”  

4. Then Rahu, releasing Canda, approached the Asura king Vepacitti. Standing before him, trembling, he said:  

“Why do you tremble, Rahu? Why release the moon? Shaking with fear, why stand here?”  

5. [Rahu:] “The Buddha’s verse struck terror. Had I not freed the moon, my head would split sevenfold. I’d find no peace.”  

1.10 Suriya  

1. Then, when Suriya was captured by Rahu, he recollected the Buddha, reciting:  

“Buddha, great hero, I take refuge in you! You are free from all bonds. I am now caught in bondage. Set me in this refuge!”  

2. The Blessed One addressed Rahu concerning Suriya:  

“Suriya has taken refuge in the Tathagata. Release the sun, Rahu! The Buddha pities the world. Blazing in the dark, radiating everywhere, consuming flames blaze aloft. Rahu cannot swallow him. Release my disciple, the sun!”  

3. Rahu, releasing Suriya, approached Vepacitti trembling.  

“Why tremble, Rahu? Why free the sun? Shaking with fear, why stand here?”  

4. [Rahu:] “The Buddha’s verse struck terror. Had I not freed the sun, my head would split sevenfold. I’d find no peace.”  

Summary Verses:  

Kasyapa, Magha, Magadha, Tamali, Kamada, Pancalacanda, Dayana, Canda, Suriya—these make ten.