3. Udayi Vagga  

21. First—Arousal  

2. At that time, a monk approached the dwelling place of the Blessed One. Having approached, he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side.  

3. Seated to one side, that monk said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, it is said, 'factors of enlightenment, factors of enlightenment.' Venerable sir, why are they called factors of enlightenment?"  

"The factors lead to enlightenment, thus they are called factors of enlightenment.  

3. Here, monks, a monk develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor depending on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment. [He develops] the dharma-investigation enlightenment factor... the energy enlightenment factor... the joy enlightenment factor... the tranquility enlightenment factor... the concentration enlightenment factor... [and] the equanimity enlightenment factor depending on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment.  

4. Monks, because they lead to enlightenment, they are called factors of enlightenment."  

22. Second—Teaching  

2. "Monks, I will teach you the seven factors of enlightenment. Listen closely.  

3. What are the seven factors of enlightenment? They are: the mindfulness enlightenment factor, the dharma-investigation enlightenment factor, the energy enlightenment factor, the joy enlightenment factor, the tranquility enlightenment factor, the concentration enlightenment factor, and the equanimity enlightenment factor. Monks, these are the seven factors of enlightenment."  

23. Third—Spheres  

2. "Monks, if one dwells with mind frequently attending to things pertaining to sensual desire, unarisen sensual desire arises, and arisen sensual desire increases and expands.  

3. If one dwells with mind frequently attending to things pertaining to ill will, unarisen ill will arises, and arisen ill will increases and expands.  

4. If one dwells with mind frequently attending to things pertaining to sloth and torpor, unarisen sloth and torpor arise, and arisen sloth and torpor increase and expand.  

5. If one dwells with mind frequently attending to things pertaining to restlessness and remorse, unarisen restlessness and remorse arise, and arisen restlessness and remorse increase and expand.  

6. If one dwells with mind frequently attending to things pertaining to doubt, unarisen doubt arises, and arisen doubt increases and expands.  

7. If one dwells with mind frequently attending to things pertaining to the mindfulness enlightenment factor, the unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor arises, and the arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor reaches full maturity... [similarly for the dharma-investigation enlightenment factor... energy enlightenment factor... joy enlightenment factor... tranquility enlightenment factor... concentration enlightenment factor...]  

8. If one dwells with mind frequently attending to things pertaining to the equanimity enlightenment factor, the unarisen equanimity enlightenment factor arises, and the arisen equanimity enlightenment factor reaches full maturity."  

24. Fourth—Improper Attention  

2. "Monks, when one attends improperly, unarisen sensual desire arises, and arisen sensual desire increases and expands.  

3. Unarisen ill will arises, and arisen ill will increases and expands.  

4. Unarisen sloth and torpor arise, and arisen sloth and torpor increase and expand.  

5. Unarisen restlessness and remorse arise, and arisen restlessness and remorse increase and expand.  

6. Unarisen doubt arises, and arisen doubt increases and expands.  

7. The unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor does not arise, and the arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor ceases... [similarly for the dharma-investigation enlightenment factor... energy enlightenment factor... joy enlightenment factor... tranquility enlightenment factor... concentration enlightenment factor...] ...the unarisen equanimity enlightenment factor does not arise, and the arisen equanimity enlightenment factor ceases.  

8. Monks, when one attends properly, unarisen sensual desire does not arise, and arisen sensual desire is abandoned.  

9. Unarisen ill will does not arise, and arisen ill will is abandoned.  

10. Unarisen sloth and torpor do not arise, and arisen sloth and torpor are abandoned.  

11. Unarisen restlessness and remorse do not arise, and arisen restlessness and remorse are abandoned.  

12. Unarisen doubt does not arise, and arisen doubt is abandoned.  

13. The unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor arises, and the arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor reaches full maturity... [similarly for the other factors] ...the unarisen equanimity enlightenment factor arises, and the arisen equanimity enlightenment factor reaches full maturity."  

25. Fifth—Non-Afflictive  

2. "Monks, I will teach you the seven non-afflictive qualities. Listen closely.  

3. What are the seven non-afflictive qualities? The seven factors of enlightenment. What are the seven? The mindfulness enlightenment factor, the dharma-investigation enlightenment factor, the energy enlightenment factor, the joy enlightenment factor, the tranquility enlightenment factor, the concentration enlightenment factor, and the equanimity enlightenment factor. Monks, these are the seven non-afflictive qualities."  

26. Sixth—Destruction  

2. "Monks, there is a path and a practice that leads to the destruction of craving. Cultivate this path and practice.  

3. What is that path and practice? The seven factors of enlightenment. What are the seven? The mindfulness enlightenment factor... [as before] ...the equanimity enlightenment factor.  

4. When this was said, Venerable Udayi said to the Blessed One: 'Venerable sir, how does cultivating and frequently practicing the seven factors of enlightenment lead to the destruction of craving?'  

5. 'Udayi, here a monk develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor depending on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment—vast, immeasurable, and non-hostile. By doing so, craving is destroyed. When craving is destroyed, kamma is destroyed; when kamma is destroyed, suffering is destroyed.  

6-11. [Similarly for the dharma-investigation enlightenment factor... energy enlightenment factor... joy enlightenment factor... tranquility enlightenment factor... concentration enlightenment factor...]  

12. He develops the equanimity enlightenment factor depending on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment—vast, immeasurable, and non-hostile. By doing so, craving is destroyed. When craving is destroyed, kamma is destroyed; when kamma is destroyed, suffering is destroyed.  

13. Udayi, thus through the destruction of craving, kamma is destroyed; through the destruction of kamma, suffering is destroyed.'  

27. Seventh—Cessation  

2. "Monks, there is a path and a practice that leads to the cessation of craving. Cultivate this path and practice.  

3. What is that path and practice? The seven factors of enlightenment... [as before] ...the equanimity enlightenment factor.  

4. How does cultivating and frequently practicing these seven factors of enlightenment lead to the cessation of craving?  

5. Here, monks, a monk develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor... [as before] ...the equanimity enlightenment factor depending on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment. Monks, cultivating and frequently practicing these seven factors thus leads to the cessation of craving."  

28. Eighth—Discernment  

2. "Monks, I will teach you the path of discernment. Listen closely.  

3. What is the path of discernment? The seven factors of enlightenment... [as before] ...the equanimity enlightenment factor.  

4. When this was said, Venerable Udayi asked: 'Venerable sir, how does cultivating and frequently practicing these seven factors of enlightenment lead to discernment?'  

5. 'Udayi, here a monk develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor depending on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment—vast, immeasurable, and non-hostile. By doing so, he discerns and shatters the previously undiscerned, unshattered mass of greed... [similarly for the mass of hatred and delusion]...  

6-11. [Similarly for the other enlightenment factors.] ...Thus, Udayi, cultivating and frequently practicing these seven factors leads to discernment.'"  

29. Ninth—One Thing  

2. "Monks, I see no other single thing that, when cultivated and frequently practiced, leads to the abandoning of the fetters. These seven factors of enlightenment... [as before] ...the equanimity enlightenment factor.  

3. How does this cultivation lead to abandoning the fetters?  

4. Here, a monk develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor... [as before] ...the equanimity enlightenment factor depending on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment.  

5. What are the fetters? The eye is a fetter—the desire and lust for it is a fetter here. The ear... nose... tongue... body... mind is a fetter—the desire and lust for it is a fetter here. These are called the fetters."  

30. Tenth—Udayi  

1. At that time, the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sumbhas, in the Sumbhan town named Sedaka.  

2. Then Venerable Udayi approached the Blessed One, paid homage, sat down to one side, and said:  

3. "It is amazing, Venerable sir! Before I went forth, I did not revere the Dhamma or the Saṅgha. Yet because of my reverence for the Blessed One, I went forth. May the Blessed One teach me: Such is form, such its origin, such its cessation... [similarly for feeling, perception, volitions, and consciousness]...  

4. Then, dwelling alone, I directly knew: 'This is suffering... origin... cessation... path.'  

5. I developed the mindfulness enlightenment factor... [as before] ...the equanimity enlightenment factor. Cultivating these, I dwelled reaching thusness, knowing: 'Destroyed is birth, the holy life fulfilled, the task done, no further becoming.'  

6. The Blessed One replied: 'Good, Udayi! Having cultivated this path, you dwelled reaching thusness... [as above].'"  

End of the Udayi Vagga.  

Summary:  
Arousal, Teaching, Spheres,  
Improper Attention, Non-Afflictive, Destruction,  
Cessation, Discernment, One Thing,  
Udayi—these ten suttas.