7. The Chapter on In-and-Out Breathing  

(57) 1. Bones  

1.1. Savatthī...  

1.2. “O bhikkhus! If one develops and cultivates the perception of bones, it bears great fruits and merits.  

1.3. O bhikkhus! How should one develop and cultivate the perception of bones so that it bears great fruits and merits?  

1.4. O bhikkhus! Here, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by the perception of bones, dependent on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment... [the enlightenment factors of discrimination of states... energy... rapture... tranquility... concentration]... dependent on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment, he develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by the perception of bones.  

1.5. O bhikkhus! When one develops and cultivates the perception of bones in this way, it bears great fruits and merits.”  

2. Or  

2.1. “O bhikkhus! If one develops and cultivates the perception of bones, one of two fruits may be expected: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue of clinging, the state of non-returning.  

2.2. O bhikkhus! How should one develop and cultivate the perception of bones so that one of two fruits may be expected: final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue of clinging, the state of non-returning?  

2.3. O bhikkhus! Here, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by the perception of bones, dependent on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment... [the enlightenment factors of discrimination of states... energy... rapture... tranquility... concentration]... he develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by the perception of bones.  

2.4. O bhikkhus! When one develops and cultivates the perception of bones in this way, one of two fruits may be expected: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue of clinging, the state of non-returning.”  

3. Great Benefit  

3.1. “O bhikkhus! Developing and cultivating the perception of bones leads to great benefit.  

3.2. O bhikkhus! How should one develop and cultivate the perception of bones so that it leads to great benefit?  

3.3. O bhikkhus! Here, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by the perception of bones, dependent on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment... [the enlightenment factors of discrimination of states... energy... rapture... tranquility... concentration]... he develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by the perception of bones.  

3.4. O bhikkhus! When one develops and cultivates the perception of bones in this way, it leads to great benefit.”  

4. Great Peace  

4.1. “O bhikkhus! Developing and cultivating the perception of bones leads to great peace.  

4.2. O bhikkhus! How should one develop and cultivate the perception of bones so that it leads to great peace?  

4.3. O bhikkhus! Here, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by the perception of bones, dependent on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment... [the enlightenment factors of discrimination of states... energy... rapture... tranquility... concentration]... he develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by the perception of bones.  

4.4. O bhikkhus! When one develops and cultivates the perception of bones in this way, it leads to great peace.”  

5. Great Disenchantment  

5.1. “O bhikkhus! Developing and cultivating the perception of bones leads to great disenchantment.  

5.2. O bhikkhus! How should one develop and cultivate the perception of bones so that it leads to great disenchantment?  

5.3. O bhikkhus! Here, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by the perception of bones, dependent on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment... [the enlightenment factors of discrimination of states... energy... rapture... tranquility... concentration]... he develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by the perception of bones.  

5.4. O bhikkhus! When one develops and cultivates the perception of bones in this way, it leads to great disenchantment.”  

6. Pleasant Dwelling  

6.1. “O bhikkhus! Developing and cultivating the perception of bones leads to a pleasant dwelling.  

6.2. O bhikkhus! How should one develop and cultivate the perception of bones so that it leads to a pleasant dwelling?  

6.3. O bhikkhus! Here, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness accompanied by the perception of bones, dependent on seclusion, dispassion, cessation, and ripening in relinquishment... [the enlightenment factors of discrimination of states... energy... rapture... tranquility... concentration]... he develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity accompanied by the perception of bones.  

6.4. O bhikkhus! When one develops and cultivates the perception of bones in this way, it leads to a pleasant dwelling.”  

(58) 2. Devouring (1–6)  

2.1. O bhikkhus! Developing the perception of devouring... and so on...  

(59) 3. Livid (1–6)  

3.1. O bhikkhus! Developing the perception of livid... and so on...  

(60) 4. Decayed (1–6)  

4.1. O bhikkhus! Developing the perception of decay...  

(61) 5. Swollen (1–6)  

5.1. O bhikkhus! Developing the perception of swollen...  

(62) 6. Loving-Kindness (1–6)  

6.1. O bhikkhus! Developing loving-kindness...  

(63) 7. Compassion (1–6)  

7.1. O bhikkhus! Developing compassion...  

(64) 8. Joy (1–6)  

8.1. O bhikkhus! Developing joy...  

(65) 9. Equanimity (1–6)  

9.1. O bhikkhus! Developing equanimity...  

(66) 10. In-and-Out Breathing (1–6)  

10.1. O bhikkhus! Developing mindfulness of in-and-out breathing...  

The summary verse of this chapter states:  
Bones, devouring, livid, decay, swollen, loving-kindness, compassion, joy, equanimity, and in-and-out breathing—these ten.  

The Seventh Chapter on the Factors of Enlightenment, The Chapter on In-and-Out Breathing (End).