6. The Section on Factors of Enlightenment  

51. First: Nutriment  

1. At Sāvatthī.  

2. “Bhikkhus, I will teach you the nourishment and the non-nourishment of the five hindrances and the seven factors of enlightenment. Listen carefully.”  

1. Nutriment of Hindrances  

3. “Bhikkhus, what is the nourishment that causes unarisen sensual desire to arise and arisen sensual desire to increase and expand? There is, bhikkhus, the sign of the attractive. Frequent improper attention to it nourishes unarisen sensual desire and causes arisen sensual desire to increase and expand.  

4. What is the nourishment that causes unarisen ill will to arise and arisen ill will to increase and expand? There is, bhikkhus, the sign of aversion. Frequent improper attention to it nourishes unarisen ill will and causes arisen ill will to increase and expand.  

5. What is the nourishment that causes unarisen sloth and torpor to arise and arisen sloth and torpor to increase and expand? There is discontent, lethargy, yawning, drowsiness after meals, and mental sluggishness. Frequent improper attention to this nourishes unarisen sloth and torpor and causes arisen sloth and torpor to increase and expand.  

6. What is the nourishment that causes unarisen restlessness and remorse to arise and arisen restlessness and remorse to increase and expand? There is a lack of mental calm. Frequent improper attention to this nourishes unarisen restlessness and remorse and causes arisen restlessness and remorse to increase and expand.  

7. What is the nourishment that causes unarisen doubt to arise and arisen doubt to increase and expand? There are things conducive to doubt. Frequent improper attention to them nourishes unarisen doubt and causes arisen doubt to increase and expand.”  

2. Nutriment of Enlightenment Factors  

8. “Bhikkhus, what is the nourishment that causes the unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor to arise and the arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor to be fully developed? There are things conducive to the mindfulness enlightenment factor. Frequent proper attention to them nourishes the unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor and causes the arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor to be fully developed.  

9. What is the nourishment that causes the unarisen investigation-of-states enlightenment factor to arise and the arisen investigation-of-states enlightenment factor to be fully developed? There are wholesome and unwholesome states, blameable and blameless states, inferior and superior states, and dark and bright states. Frequent proper attention to them nourishes the unarisen investigation-of-states enlightenment factor and causes the arisen investigation-of-states enlightenment factor to be fully developed.  

10. What is the nourishment that causes the unarisen energy enlightenment factor to arise and the arisen energy enlightenment factor to be fully developed? There is the element of exertion, the element of striving, the element of vigor. Frequent proper attention to them nourishes the unarisen energy enlightenment factor and causes the arisen energy enlightenment factor to be fully developed.  

11. What is the nourishment that causes the unarisen rapture enlightenment factor to arise and the arisen rapture enlightenment factor to be fully developed? There are things conducive to the rapture enlightenment factor. Frequent proper attention to them nourishes the unarisen rapture enlightenment factor and causes the arisen rapture enlightenment factor to be fully developed.  

12. What is the nourishment that causes the unarisen tranquility enlightenment factor to arise and the arisen tranquility enlightenment factor to be fully developed? There are physical tranquility and mental tranquility. Frequent proper attention to them nourishes the unarisen tranquility enlightenment factor and causes the arisen tranquility enlightenment factor to be fully developed.  

13. What is the nourishment that causes the unarisen concentration enlightenment factor to arise and the arisen concentration enlightenment factor to be fully developed? There are the sign of serenity and the sign of nondistraction. Frequent proper attention to them nourishes the unarisen concentration enlightenment factor and causes the arisen concentration enlightenment factor to be fully developed.  

14. What is the nourishment that causes the unarisen equanimity enlightenment factor to arise and the arisen equanimity enlightenment factor to be fully developed? There are things conducive to the equanimity enlightenment factor. Frequent proper attention to them nourishes the unarisen equanimity enlightenment factor and causes the arisen equanimity enlightenment factor to be fully developed.”  

3. Non-Nourishment of Hindrances  

15. “Bhikkhus, what is the non-nourishment that prevents unarisen sensual desire from arising and arisen sensual desire from increasing and expanding? There is the sign of the unattractive. Frequent proper attention to it prevents unarisen sensual desire from arising and arisen sensual desire from increasing and expanding.  

16. What is the non-nourishment that prevents unarisen ill will from arising and arisen ill will from increasing and expanding? There is the liberation of the mind through loving-kindness. Frequent proper attention to it prevents unarisen ill will from arising and arisen ill will from increasing and expanding.  

17. What is the non-nourishment that prevents unarisen sloth and torpor from arising and arisen sloth and torpor from increasing and expanding? There is the element of exertion, the element of striving, the element of vigor. Frequent proper attention to them prevents unarisen sloth and torpor from arising and arisen sloth and torpor from increasing and expanding.  

18. What is the non-nourishment that prevents unarisen restlessness and remorse from arising and arisen restlessness and remorse from increasing and expanding? There is mental calm. Frequent proper attention to it prevents unarisen restlessness and remorse from arising and arisen restlessness and remorse from increasing and expanding.  

19. What is the non-nourishment that prevents unarisen doubt from arising and arisen doubt from increasing and expanding? There are wholesome and unwholesome states, blameable and blameless states, inferior and superior states, and dark and bright states. Frequent proper attention to them prevents unarisen doubt from arising and arisen doubt from increasing and expanding.”  

4. Non-Nourishment of Enlightenment Factors  

20. “Bhikkhus, what is the non-nourishment that prevents the unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor from being fully developed? There are things conducive to the mindfulness enlightenment factor. Frequent improper attention to them prevents the unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor from being fully developed.  

21. What is the non-nourishment that prevents the unarisen investigation-of-states enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen investigation-of-states enlightenment factor from being fully developed? There are wholesome and unwholesome states, blameable and blameless states, inferior and superior states, and dark and bright states. Frequent improper attention to them prevents the unarisen investigation-of-states enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen investigation-of-states enlightenment factor from being fully developed.  

22. What is the non-nourishment that prevents the unarisen energy enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen energy enlightenment factor from being fully developed? There is the element of exertion, the element of striving, the element of vigor. Frequent improper attention to them prevents the unarisen energy enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen energy enlightenment factor from being fully developed.  

23. What is the non-nourishment that prevents the unarisen rapture enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen rapture enlightenment factor from being fully developed? There are things conducive to the rapture enlightenment factor. Frequent improper attention to them prevents the unarisen rapture enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen rapture enlightenment factor from being fully developed.  

24. What is the non-nourishment that prevents the unarisen tranquility enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen tranquility enlightenment factor from being fully developed? There are physical tranquility and mental tranquility. Frequent improper attention to them prevents the unarisen tranquility enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen tranquility enlightenment factor from being fully developed.  

25. What is the non-nourishment that prevents the unarisen concentration enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen concentration enlightenment factor from being fully developed? There are the sign of serenity and the sign of nondistraction. Frequent improper attention to them prevents the unarisen concentration enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen concentration enlightenment factor from being fully developed.  

26. What is the non-nourishment that prevents the unarisen equanimity enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen equanimity enlightenment factor from being fully developed? There are things conducive to the equanimity enlightenment factor. Frequent improper attention to them prevents the unarisen equanimity enlightenment factor from arising and the arisen equanimity enlightenment factor from being fully developed.”  

52. Second: Approach  

2. Then, many bhikkhus entered Sāvatthī for alms. They thought it too early and visited the park of the wanderers of other sects.  

3-8. The wanderers questioned them about the similarity between the Buddha’s teaching and theirs regarding the seven enlightenment factors. The bhikkhus reported this to the Buddha.  

11. The Buddha explained: “If questioned, you should say, ‘There is an approach by which the five hindrances are tenfold and the seven enlightenment factors fourteenfold.’ They cannot answer and become confused. This is beyond their realm.”  

1. Five Become Ten  

13. The Buddha analyzed each hindrance (sensory desire, ill will, sloth-torpor, restlessness-remorse, doubt) as having internal and external aspects, making five into ten.  

2. Seven Become Fourteen  

20. Likewise, each enlightenment factor (mindfulness, investigation, energy, rapture, tranquility, concentration, equanimity) has internal and external aspects, making seven into fourteen.  

53. Third: The Fire  

2. Similar approach as in the previous sutta, concluding with a fire analogy for appropriate application of enlightenment factors.  

13-21. When the mind is sluggish, cultivating investigation, energy, and rapture is timely; cultivating tranquility, concentration, and equanimity is untimely. When restless, the reverse applies.  

54. Fourth: Loving-Kindness  

5-15. The Buddha distinguishes the liberation of mind through loving-kindness, compassion, altruistic joy, and equanimity, culminating in successively higher meditative attainments (base of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness).  

55. Fifth: Saṅgārava  

4-8. Through similes of colored water bowls, the Buddha explains how the hindrances obstruct wisdom.  
10-14. The absence of hindrances allows wisdom to arise.  
16-17. Cultivating the enlightenment factors leads to liberation.  

56. Sixth: Fearless  

4-10. The Buddha explains hindrances as causes of ignorance and enlightenment factors as causes of true knowledge.  
12-19. Cultivating enlightenment factors leads to liberation through successive stages.  

Concluding Verses:  
The Section on Factors of Enlightenment, Sixth Section.