6. Tree Chapter  

[51] 1. Thought  

1. Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.  

2. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus!" — "Venerable sir!" those bhikkhus replied to the Blessed One.  

3. The Blessed One said: "Bhikkhus, what should a bhikkhu carefully consider in order to rightly attain the cessation of suffering?"  

"Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, relying on the Blessed One. It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning of this statement. Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will remember it."  

4. "Then listen and attend closely, I will speak."  

"Yes, venerable sir," those bhikkhus replied to the Blessed One.  

The Blessed One said:  

5. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'There is this diversity of suffering—aging and death—arisen in the world. What is the cause, origin, birth, and source of this suffering? When what exists does aging and death exist? When what is absent does aging and death not exist?'  

6. Through careful consideration, he understands: 'This diversity of suffering—aging and death—arises in the world. Aging and death have birth as their cause, birth as their origin, birth as their birth, birth as their source. When birth exists, aging and death exist. When birth is absent, aging and death do not exist.'  

7. He understands aging and death, their origin, their cessation, and the path leading to their cessation. Thus he practices in accordance with the Dhamma.  

8. Bhikkhus, the bhikkhu who practices thus rightly brings about the cessation of suffering: the cessation of aging and death.  

9. Further, he considers: 'But what is the cause of birth? What causes existence? What causes clinging? What causes craving? What causes feeling? What causes contact? What causes the six sense bases? What causes name-and-form? What causes consciousness? What causes volitional activities? What is their origin, birth, and source? When what exists do volitional activities exist? When what is absent do they not exist?'  

10. Through careful consideration, he understands: 'Volitional activities have ignorance as their cause, ignorance as their origin, ignorance as their birth, ignorance as their source. When ignorance exists, volitional activities exist. When ignorance is absent, volitional activities do not exist.'  

11. He understands volitional activities, their origin, their cessation, and the path leading to their cessation. Thus he practices in accordance with the Dhamma. Bhikkhus, the bhikkhu who practices thus rightly brings about the cessation of suffering: the cessation of volitional activities.  

12. Bhikkhus, one immersed in ignorance generates wholesome kamma—their consciousness is directed toward the wholesome. If they generate unwholesome kamma—their consciousness is directed toward the unwholesome. If they generate imperturbable kamma—their consciousness is directed toward the imperturbable.  

13. Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu abandons ignorance and arises in knowledge, having abandoned ignorance and arisen in knowledge, they do not generate wholesome kamma, unwholesome kamma, or imperturbable kamma.  

14. Through non-generation and non-attention, they grasp nothing in the world. Not grasping, they are unafraid. Being unafraid, they personally attain Nibbana, understanding: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this world.'  

15. When feeling a pleasant feeling, they know it as impermanent, not to be clung to, not to be delighted in. When feeling a painful feeling, they know it as impermanent, not to be clung to, not to be delighted in. When feeling a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, they know it as impermanent, not to be clung to, not to be delighted in.  

16. Feeling a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached. Feeling a painful feeling, they feel it detached. Feeling a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, they feel it detached.  

17. Feeling a feeling terminating with the body, they understand: 'I feel a feeling terminating with the body.' Feeling a feeling terminating with life, they understand: 'I feel a feeling terminating with life.' When the body breaks up, they understand: 'Life is exhausted. All feelings have cooled. Relics remain, devoid of delight.'  

18. Bhikkhus, just as a hot clay pot taken from a kiln, placed on level ground, cools down and its shards remain, so too a bhikkhu feels a feeling terminating with the body, understands it, feels a feeling terminating with life, understands it. When the body breaks up, they understand: 'Life is exhausted. All feelings have cooled. Relics remain, devoid of delight.'  

19. Bhikkhus, what do you think? Would a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed generate wholesome kamma, unwholesome kamma, or imperturbable kamma?"  

"Venerable sir, they would not."  

20. "When no kamma is generated, with the cessation of kamma, would consciousness be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, it would not."  

21. "When there is no consciousness, with the cessation of consciousness, would name-and-form be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, it would not."  

22. "When there is no name-and-form, with the cessation of name-and-form, would the six sense bases be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, they would not."  

23. "When there are no six sense bases, with the cessation of the six sense bases, would contact be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, it would not."  

24. "When there is no contact, with the cessation of contact, would feeling be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, it would not."  

25. "When there is no feeling, would craving be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, it would not."  

26. "When there is no craving, with the cessation of craving, would clinging be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, it would not."  

27. "When there is no clinging, with the cessation of clinging, would existence be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, it would not."  

28. "When there is no existence, with the cessation of existence, would birth be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, it would not."  

29. "When there is no birth, with the cessation of birth, would aging and death be ascribed?"  

"Venerable sir, they would not."  

30. "Good, bhikkhus! Thus, bhikkhus, this is not other-dependent. Rely on my words, free from doubt, for this is the end of suffering."  

[52] 2. Clinging  

1. [The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.]  

2. [The Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that can be clung to, craving increases. From craving as condition, clinging arises. From clinging as condition, existence arises. From existence as condition, birth arises. From birth as condition, aging, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, and despair arise. Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

3. Suppose a great bonfire were burning fueled by ten, twenty, thirty, or forty cartloads of wood. Someone would periodically toss dry grass, dry cow dung, or dry wood into it. Bhikkhus, thus that bonfire would burn long with such fuel.  

4. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that can be clung to, craving increases... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

5. When one dwells contemplating danger in things that can be clung to, craving ceases. With the cessation of craving, clinging ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

6. Suppose a great bonfire were burning fueled by ten, twenty, thirty, or forty cartloads of wood. No one would toss dry grass, dry cow dung, or dry wood into it. Bhikkhus, thus that bonfire would burn out when the original fuel is consumed, not being fed with more.  

7. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating danger in things that can be clung to, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."  

[53] 3. Bonds (1)  

1. [The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.]  

2. [The Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that are bonds, craving increases... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

3. Suppose an oil lamp burns dependent on oil and a wick. Someone would periodically refill the oil and adjust the wick. Bhikkhus, thus that lamp would burn long.  

4. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that are bonds, craving increases... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

5. When one dwells contemplating danger in things that are bonds, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

6. Suppose an oil lamp burns dependent on oil and a wick. No one would refill the oil or adjust the wick. Bhikkhus, thus that lamp would go out when the original fuel is consumed, not being replenished.  

7. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating danger in things that are bonds, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."  

[54] 4. Bonds (2)  

1. [The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.]  

2. [The Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, suppose an oil lamp burns dependent on oil and a wick. Someone refuels it periodically and tends the wick. Thus the lamp burns long. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that are bonds, craving increases... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

3. Suppose an oil lamp burns dependent on oil and a wick. No one refuels it or tends the wick. Thus the lamp extinguishes when its fuel is consumed. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating danger in things that are bonds, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."  

[55] 5. Great Tree (1)  

1. [The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.]  

2. [The Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that can be clung to, craving increases... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

3. Suppose a great tree's roots spread downward, drawing up nutrients and water. Thus the tree stands long. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that can be clung to, craving increases... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

4. When one dwells contemplating danger in things that can be clung to, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

5. Suppose a great tree is uprooted, cut into logs, split into splinters, dried, burned, reduced to ash, scattered by wind or washed away. Thus that tree is destroyed at the root, like a palmyra stump, made unable to arise again.  

6. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating danger in things that can be clung to, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."  

[56] 6. Great Tree (2)  

1. [The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.]  

2. [The Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, suppose a great tree's roots spread downward, drawing up nutrients and water. Thus the tree stands long. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that can be clung to, craving increases... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

3. Suppose a great tree is uprooted... unable to arise again. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating danger in things that can be clung to, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."  

[57] 7. Sapling  

1. [The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.]  

2. [The Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that are bonds, craving increases... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

3. Suppose a sapling is nurtured with soil, manure, and water. Thus it grows. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that are bonds, craving increases...  

4. When one dwells contemplating danger in things that are bonds, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

5. Suppose a sapling is uprooted... unable to arise again. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating danger in things that are bonds, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."  

[58] 8. Name-and-Form  

1. [The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.]  

2. [The Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that are bonds, name-and-form manifests. With name-and-form as condition, the six sense bases arise... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

3. Suppose a great tree's roots spread downward... Similarly, name-and-form manifests...  

4. When one dwells contemplating danger in things that are bonds, name-and-form ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

5. Suppose a great tree is uprooted... unable to arise again. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating danger in things that are bonds... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."  

[59] 9. Consciousness  

1. [The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi.]  

2. [The Blessed One said:] "Bhikkhus, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that are bonds, consciousness manifests. With consciousness as condition, name-and-form arises... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

3. Suppose a great tree's roots spread downward... Similarly, consciousness manifests...  

4. When one dwells contemplating danger in things that are bonds, consciousness ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

5. Suppose a great tree is uprooted... unable to arise again. Similarly, when one dwells contemplating danger in things that are bonds... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."  

[60] 10. Cause  

1. [The Blessed One was dwelling among the Kurus at Kammasadhamma.]  

2. Then Venerable Ananda approached the Blessed One...  

3. [Ananda said:] "It is amazing, venerable sir, how profound this dependent origination is, yet it appears to me as clear as clear!"  

4. [The Blessed One said:] "Do not say so, Ananda! This dependent origination is deep. Failing to understand it, beings are tangled like thread, smothered like murky foam, unable to escape suffering.  

5. Ananda, when one dwells contemplating gratification in things that can be clung to, craving increases... Thus is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.  

6. Suppose a great tree's roots spread downward...  

7. Similarly, craving increases...  

8. When one dwells contemplating danger in things that can be clung to, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.  

9. Suppose a great tree is uprooted... unable to arise again. Similarly, craving ceases... Thus is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."  

These ten suttas include: Thought, Clinging, two on Bonds, two on Great Tree, Sapling, Name-and-Form, Consciousness, Cause.