1. First: The Ganges Expanded Discourse  
1.1–12. First to twelfth.  
1.1–2.  

At Savatthi. There, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus:  

"Bhikkhus, there are Four Right Efforts. What are the Four Right Efforts?  

3.  

Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu generates desire, strives, arouses energy, exerts the mind, and strives to prevent unarisen evil, unwholesome states from arising.  

4.  

He generates desire, strives, arouses energy, exerts the mind, and strives to eliminate arisen evil, unwholesome states.  

5.  

He generates desire, strives, arouses energy, exerts the mind, and strives to arouse unarisen wholesome states.  

6.  

He generates desire, strives, arouses energy, exerts the mind, and strives to maintain, not forget, increase, expand, develop, and perfect arisen wholesome states.  

7.  

Bhikkhus, these are the Four Right Efforts.  

8.  

Bhikkhus, just as the Ganges River flows, slopes, and inclines toward the east, so too, a bhikkhu who cultivates and frequently practices the Four Right Efforts flows, slopes, and inclines toward Nibbana.  

Bhikkhus, how does a bhikkhu who cultivates and frequently practices the Four Right Efforts flow, slope, and incline toward Nibbana?  

9.  

Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu generates desire, strives, arouses energy, exerts the mind, and strives to prevent unarisen evil, unwholesome states from arising. He generates desire, strives, arouses energy, exerts the mind, and strives to eliminate arisen evil, unwholesome states. He generates desire, strives, arouses energy, exerts the mind, and strives to arouse unarisen wholesome states. He generates desire, strives, arouses energy, exerts the mind, and strives to maintain, not forget, increase, expand, develop, and perfect arisen wholesome states.  

10.  

Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who thus cultivates and frequently practices the Four Right Efforts flows, slopes, and inclines toward Nibbana."  

The summary verses state:  

Six on flowing east,  
Six on flowing to the sea—  
Two times six makes twelve:  
Thus this chapter is taught.  

The Ganges Chapter linked to the Right Efforts is fully explained through the practice of efforts.