7. The Exposition on Living Beings (1)  

61. First: Other Realms  

2. Then, the Blessed One placed a small amount of dust on his fingertip and addressed the monks:  

3. “Monks, what do you think? Which is more: the small amount of dust I have placed on my fingertip, or the soil of the great earth?”  

“Venerable sir, the soil of the great earth is far greater. The small amount of dust on the Blessed One’s fingertip is minuscule. Compared to the soil of the great earth, it cannot be measured, reckoned, or even considered a fraction.”  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings who are reborn among humans are few. Those reborn in other realms are far more numerous. Why is that?  

5. It is because they have not seen the Four Noble Truths. What are the Four? The noble truth of suffering, the noble truth of the origin of suffering, the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and the noble truth of the path leading to the cessation of suffering.  

6. Therefore, monks, you should strive with diligence: ‘This is suffering.’ Strive with diligence: ‘This is the origin of suffering.’ Strive with diligence: ‘This is the cessation of suffering.’ Strive with diligence: ‘This is the path leading to the cessation of suffering.’”  

62. Second: Border Regions  

2. Then, the Blessed One placed a small amount of dust on his fingertip and addressed the monks:  

3. “Monks, what do you think? Which is more: the small amount of dust I have placed on my fingertip, or the soil of the great earth?”  

“Venerable sir, the soil of the great earth is far greater. The small amount of dust on the Blessed One’s fingertip is minuscule. Compared to the soil of the great earth, it cannot be measured, reckoned, or even considered a fraction.”  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings reborn in central lands are few. Those reborn in border regions, among ignorant barbarians, are far more numerous... and so on...”  

63. Third: Wisdom  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings endowed with the noble eye of wisdom are few. Those shrouded in ignorance and delusion are far more numerous... and so on...”  

64. Fourth: Alcohol  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings who abstain from alcohol are few. Those who do not abstain are far more numerous... and so on...”  

65. Fifth: Water  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings dwelling on land are few. Those dwelling in water are far more numerous... and so on...”  

66. Sixth: Mother  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings who honor their mothers are few. Those who do not honor them are far more numerous... and so on...”  

67. Seventh: Father  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings who honor their fathers are few. Those who do not honor them are far more numerous... and so on...”  

68. Eighth: Ascetics  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings who revere ascetics are few. Those who do not revere them are far more numerous... and so on...”  

69. Ninth: Brahmins  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings who revere Brahmins are few. Those who do not revere them are far more numerous... and so on...”  

70. Tenth: Respect  

4. “Monks, so too, the beings who respect the noble families are few. Those who do not respect them are far more numerous... and so on...”  

End of the Seventh Chapter: The Exposition on Living Beings (1).  

Here is the summary verse:  
Other realms and border regions,  
Wisdom, alcohol, and water,  
Mother, father, ascetics,  
Brahmins, respect.