2. The Chapter on Suffering and Joy  

2.1 The First: Suffering  

1. At one time the Blessed One was staying at Savatthi.  
2. Then the Blessed One addressed the monks:  
3. "Monks, samsara has no discernible beginning. Beings, hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving, wander and cycle through samsara without knowing its origin.  
4. Monks, when you see suffering and misery in this world, you should conclude with certainty: ‘For a long time, we too have endured this!’  
5. Why is that? Monks, samsara has no discernible beginning... This is enough to attain liberation."  

2.2 The Second: Joy  

1. [At that time, the Blessed One was staying at Savatthi.]  
2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, samsara has no discernible beginning...  
3. Monks, when you see joy and prosperity in this world, you should conclude with certainty: ‘For a long time, we too have experienced this!’  
4. Why is that? Monks, samsara has no discernible beginning... hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving... This is enough to attain liberation."  

2.3 The Third: The Thirty (Bhikkhus)  

1. [At that time, the Blessed One was staying at the Bamboo Grove in Rajagaha.]  
2. At that time, about thirty bhikkhus from Pava were dwelling in the forest, all of them alms-seekers, wearers of rag robes, possessors of three robes, yet all still bound by defilements. These thirty bhikkhus approached the Blessed One. Having approached, they paid homage and sat to one side.  
3. Then the Blessed One thought: "These thirty bhikkhus from Pava... are all still bound by defilements. Let me teach them the Dhamma so they may become free from clinging and liberate their minds from the taints."  
4. Then the Blessed One addressed the monks: "Monks!" They replied: "Venerable Sir!"  
5. The Blessed One said: "Monks, samsara has no discernible beginning...  
6. Monks, what do you think? Which is greater: the blood you have shed from your heads being split open as you wandered through samsara over this long time, or the water in the four great oceans?"  
7. "Venerable Sir, we understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One: the blood shed from our heads over this long time is far greater than the water in the four oceans."  
8. "Good, monks! It is good that you understand the Dhamma thus...  
10. Monks, when you were born as bulls over countless ages...  
17. Monks, when you were bandits raiding villages...  
20. Why is that? Monks, samsara has no discernible beginning... This is enough to attain liberation."  
21. When the Blessed One concluded this teaching, the monks rejoiced in his words.  
22. As this teaching was being spoken, the thirty bhikkhus from Pava became free from clinging and liberated their minds from the taints.  

2.4 The Fourth: Mother  

1. [At that time, the Blessed One was staying at Savatthi.]  
2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, samsara has no discernible beginning...  
3. Monks, it is hard to find any being who has not been your mother in this long journey.  
4. Why is that? Monks... This is enough to attain liberation."  

2.5 The Fifth: Father  
... (similarly abridged for brevity)  

2.6 The Sixth: Brother  
...  
2.7 The Seventh: Sister  
...  
2.8 The Eighth: Son  
...  
2.9 The Ninth: Daughter  

1. [At that time, the Blessed One was staying at Savatthi.]  
2. [The Blessed One said:] "Monks, samsara has no discernible beginning...  
... It is hard to find any being who has not been your daughter."  
...  

2.10 The Tenth: Mount Vepulla  

1. [At that time, the Blessed One was staying at Vultures’ Peak in Rajagaha.]  
2. The Blessed One addressed the monks...  
3. The Blessed One said: "Monks, samsara has no discernible beginning...  
4. Monks, in the past, this Mount Vepulla was called East Bamboo Hill. At that time, people lived for 40,000 years. They took four days to climb and four days to descend this mountain.  
5. Then appeared the Blessed One Krakucchanda, the Tathagata... His two chief disciples were Vidhura and Sajjiva.  
6. See now! That mountain’s name is gone, those people have died, that Blessed One has passed into Parinibbana.  
7. Monks, all formations are impermanent... This is enough to attain liberation.  
15. Now, this mountain is called Vepulla. People now live at most 100 years...  
16. Now I, the Tathagata, have arisen in the world... My two chief disciples are Sariputta and Moggallana.  
17. This mountain’s name will vanish, these people will die, and I too will attain Parinibbana.  
18. Monks, all formations are impermanent... This is enough to attain liberation."  
19. The Blessed One then recited these verses:  
  (1) East Bamboo Hill with the Tivarans,  
  The Red Horses of Vankaka,  
  Subiya of Mount Supassa,  
  Vepulla of the Magadhans...  
  (2) But all formations are impermanent,  
  Arising and ceasing.  
  Having arisen, they pass away—  
  Their cessation is true bliss.  

Summary Verses:  
Suffering, joy, the thirty, mother, father,  
Brother, sister, children, and Vepulla.